I have now written to you: if you do not wish to be implicated in this matter, do not hand over the city for destruction, but guard it, I will praise you before the king, my lord.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
15 she-camels, of the house of the lady of the palace, ...
5 sheaves — Ša-Aššur-dubbu, of the town of Aššur-iddina.
... the 'outside.'
what ...
... he should not do
... Now then ...
Total, the estate of the ...
Nabû-šar-ahhešu, eunuch of the crown prince, has contracted and bought him from Il-amar for 10 minas of copper.
Witness Barruqu, chariot driver.
After the god Marduk, great lord, had commanded me to complete the cult centers, (and) after I had made the statues of the great gods, I invited inside them (the cult centers) the gods who support me and made (them) dwell on (their) eternal dais(es).
2 ... ,
Witness Urdu-Nabû, scribe.
... I have given ... to the magnates, the chariots and the horses ...
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
To the king, my lord: your servant PN. Good health to the king, my lord!
... 1 'litre' for ... ;
1, the prefects of the royal corps;
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the ... th day of this month, the month ... of this year,
4 cavalry mounts from the treasurer:
40 hectares of field in the town of Barzanâ, 40 hectares of field in the town of Zizî,
Month Adar (XII), 12th day, eponym year of Bel-emuranni, governor of Que.
... Šulmu-šarri
Ahu-duri, ... ;
... in the place of ...
... -naṣir, ... ; 1 woman; 1 daughter, weaned; 2 ... ;
He (the god Marduk) ordered me to complete the cult centers, to renovate the shrines, (and) to organize well the rites of Esagil, the palace of the gods. Every month, the gods Sîn and Šamaš together, at their appearance, answered me with a firm ‘yes’ concerning the avenging of Akkad.
Ditto by Nabû and Marduk!
... of the palace, the chief eunuch, the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the
I brought Dunānu (and) Samgunu, sons of Bēl-iqīša — Gambulians whose ancestors had harassed the kings, my ancestors, and, moreover, (who) themselves disturbed my exercising the kingship — out of the city Bīt-Imbî and I counted (them) as booty. I brought (them) into Baltil (Aššur) and the city Arbela to praise (me) in the future.
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether NN or his sons or his grandsons, ... ,
Witness Mannu-ki-Ninua, scribe.
... the goddess Ištar, mistress of war, who loves me, who selected me (lit. “who called my name”), (and) who allowed me to stand over my enemies, (and) who gave me the scepter, the throne, (and) the staff, the holy symbols of kingship, (and) allowed me to exercise dominion over the lands, (and) allowed me to shepherd the people (and) to organize well the confused people, (and) allowed me to make the foundation of their royal throne secure, (and) allowed me to make their reign long
... the king, your father, has done you a favour.
If Jupiter becomes visible in the month of Sivan (III): the flood will come.
... Na'di-Aššur,
... of the river Ḫusur
10 talents, the tailor(s) of the palace.
Witness Sasî, porter.
... of the land of Akkad ... I marched ... I captured the cities ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ...
Aššur has gone out to the steppe ...
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
The king, my lord, knows that we are in the king my lord's presence. If we did not stay in the king my lord's presence, we would not be able to do the king's work. Now, if we did not stay in the king my lord's presence, we would not be able to do the king my lord's work.
horses ...
(As for) Aplāya, son of Nabû-salim, grandson of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), whose father had fled to the land Elam before the father of the father who had engendered me — after I had installed Umman-menanu (Ḫumban-menanu) as king in the land Elam, (viii 10) (and) had made him take an oath by the great gods, he (Umman-menanu) seized Apl
1 house, 1 threshing floor, 3 orchards, 3 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ...
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Witness Šarru-emuranni.
(As for) the rest of the people of the land Bīt-Yakīn, who had fled from my weapons and (... ) had taken refuge in the city Nagītu of the land Elam, I captured (and) plundered that city.
The money is paid completely.
The palace of the great gods, whose foundations are as firm as bedrock, ... whose foundation(s) are as firm as the heavens,
If he appoints him, as long as he holds this position, will he instigate an insurrection and rebellion against Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, and Assurbanipal, the crown prince of the Succession Palace, or cause others to instigate it?
(As for) Uaiteʾ (Iautaʾ), son of Hazael, who had fled to me (and) had grasped my feet, I brought him into the city Arrapḫa, which is on the bank of the Euphrates River, (and) I installed him as king. I placed ... eunuchs of mine as provincial governors over him. I imposed upon him tribute (and) payment (in recognition) of my overlordship.
If a planet becomes visible in the month of your watch: the flood will come.
Bel-Hu-... , chariot owner;
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Remutti-ilani or his sons or his grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Aššur-šumu-uṣur and his sons and his grandsons, shall pay x minas of refined silver to the god Aššur, his lord.
A tablet of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, to the scribe of the palace, his lord. Good health to my lord!
Month Tebet (X), 15th day, eponym year of Ša-Nabû-šû.
the chariot ...
... and ...
The son of Zababa-eṭir ...
The Lady of Arbela, the Lady of Nineveh,
... of ... lu-šulmu
Total 400, at 2 seahs each.
The palace of Aššur-dān (II), great king, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tiglath-pileser (II), (who was) also king of the universe (and) king of Assyria.
... and the rest of the ...
Now, if it is agreeable to my lord, let my lord ... and ... in the presence of the chief ...
Abi-hari, gardener, x persons ... ;
Total, the offerings of the chief judge.
... his servant ...
If a planet comes close to the top of the moon: the king will exercise world dominion.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Zabî or his son or his grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Šumma-ilani, his sons and his grandsons,
Adad-nārārī, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-dān (II), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Tiglath-pileser (II) (who was) also vice-regent of the god Aššur:
They (= the Babylonians) opened the treasury of Esagil and took out the gold (and) silver of the god Bēl (Marduk) (and) the goddess Zarpanītu, the property of the temple of the god Nabû (and) the property of the temple of the goddess Tašmētu, the property of the temple of the god Nannāru, the property of the temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, (and) the property of the temple of the goddess Ištar of Arbela.
... and the king, my lord, ...
... regular offerings;
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Concerning the ...
Witness Nabû-...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Zabinu or his sons or his grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Šumma-ilani and his sons, shall pay 10 minas of refined silver and 10 minas of pure gold.
all the ... s ...
2 hectares of field in the town of Sairi, adjoining the field of Ahi-immê and the field of the town of Sairi;
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health  to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my  lord!
News of the son of Yakin: he is in ...
... the king, my lord ...
If on the 13th day the moon and sun are seen together: unreliable speech; there will be bad ways in the land; the enemy will plunder in the land.
Witness Sin-šallim.
The king, my lord, should ask the chief of servants about the men who were sold for money. They should give them back.
Now, ever since the king, my lord, appointed me, I have been revering the gods of the king, my lord, and the gods of Babylonia, and have been doing everything the king, my lord, ordered me to do. Now, the king, my lord, has written to me, saying: "You are to do the work of the king, my lord, and you are to keep the watch of the king, my lord."
a chariot ...
Witness Mar-Biti, ...
in the service of ...
Just as a snake and a mongoose do not enter the same hole to lie there together but think only of cutting each other's throat, so may you and your women not enter the same room to lie down in the same bed.
From the mouth of the woman Urkittu-šarrat of Uruk.
They are ... their ...
Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, who now is intent on sending Ša-Nabû-šû, chief eunuch, with men, horses, and an army, as great as he wishes, to the city ... , and who is now planning to send Ša-Nabû-šû, chief eunuch, with men, horses, and an army, as great as he wishes, to the city ... , and who is now planning to send Ša-Nabû-šû, chief eunuch, with men, horses, and an army, as great
Month Tammuz (IV), ... th day, eponym year of Aššur-duru-uṣur.
Nur-Šamaš,
the heart ...
they are making ...
... the blood
... the elders ...
Now, if it is agreeable to the king, my lord, ...
300 Itu'eans, 300 Gurumeans, 100 Ḫamrāneans, 100 Ḫašiliteans, 100 Ḫindareans, 100 Qatneans, 100 Ḫazaleans, 100 Qadabiteans, 100 Ḫamrānu, 100 Ḫašilite, 100 Ḫindare,
... Aššur-šumu-lešir
... messengers of the king, our lord, have come to us, saying: "... you have been sent to us."
After I had finished the work on my palace, I invited inside it the god Aššur, the great lord, (and) the gods and goddesses living in Assyria, and (then) I made splendid offerings and presented my gift(s).
... in the palace
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 17th day, eponym year of Bel-lu-dari, governor of Marqasa.
I, Ninurta-kudurrī-uṣur, the one who reveres the gods, am the one who provides for you. I am the one who is assiduous towards your shrines and am assiduous towards your daises.
Witness Nabû-dur-beli.
To Sin-abu-uṣur:
You prepare a tray on ...
... the herald of the king ...
I am a servant of the king, my lord, and I am loyal to the king, my lord. I have been treated like a dog, but I am a dog of the king, my lord. I have been treated like a dog, but I am a dog of the king, my lord. I have been treated like a dog, but I am a dog of the king, my lord. I have been treated like a dog, but I am a dog of the king, my lord.
of the people of my land ...
The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The king, my lord, should ask Bel-ibni and the son of Ašipâ: they know that they have been selling the slaves of the king, my lord, for money. The king, my lord, should also ask the son of Ašipâ: he knows that he has been selling the king's men for money.
... he has given ...
There is a hole in the top of the 'finger.' The base of the middle part is 'loose.'
I have been told that the king, my lord, has given me 15,000 bricks. I have also been told that the king, my lord, has given me 10,000 bricks. Now, I have given out 15,000 bricks from the king, my lord, and 10,000 bricks from my own stock. I have given out 25,000 bricks in all. But I have not given out the bricks of the king, my lord, which are in my possession.
Witness Abaya.
I have sent my messenger to the king, my lord, but he has not yet returned.
NN, porter;
The breast-bone is trimmed on the right and on the left...
Concerning the ... about which Aššur-... wrote to me: "... the servants ...
Now then, he is on his way to the Palace.
... the goddess Ištar, my lady,
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, then I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, (ii 5') fortified cities, together with the small(er) settlements in their environs (and) the district of the land Bīt-Barrû in its entirety, and I
Witness Mannu-...
The palace of Aššur-rēša-iši, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-rabi (II), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Enlil-nāṣir (II), (who was) also vice-regent of the god Aššur:
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nadin-šumi. Good health  to the king, my lord! May Aššur, Sin, Šamaš, Bel, and  Nabû bless the king, my lord! May they sate the king, my lord,  with old age and fullness of life! May they keep firm the foundations  of the royal throne of the king, my lord, until far-off days!
After I had finished the work on my palace, I invited inside it the god Aššur, the great lord, (and) the gods and goddesses living in Assyria, and (then) I made splendid offerings and presented my gift(s). I made fine oil from olives and aromatics. At the inauguration of the palace, I had the heads of the subjects of my land drenched (and) I watered their insides with sweet wine. (viii 15) I made fine oil from olives and aromatics. At the inauguration of
The king should ask the chief ...
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 1st day, eponym year of Mar-larim, chief ...
2 heads (and) the breasts of 4 roast sheep.
The king, my lord, should ask the scribe of the house of Aššur-etel-ilani, the scribe of the house of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the scribe of the house of Bel-naṣir, the scribe of the house of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the scribe of the house of Aššur-etel-ilani, the scribe of the house of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the scribe of the house of Bel-naṣir, the
If the king, my lord, orders, I will send the king, my lord, a tablet concerning the 100 men about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me.
We shall send the king, my lord, a horse and a mule.
The king, my lord, should ask the chief scribe ...
Seal of NN,
Nabû-šuma-iškun, the sheikh of Babylon, who had become hostile to the land of Akkad, saw the might of the gods Aššur, Bēl (Marduk), and Nabû and became frightened. He brought the people of Babylon into fortresses. He abandoned the city Babylon and set out for the land Elam.
1, Nabû-šarru-uṣur, governor of Nineveh;
... the temple of the goddess Ištar ...
their sons ...
8 homers;
I have heard that the king, my lord, has sent a messenger to me, saying: "Why have you not sent me an answer to my letter?"
... minas of silver
... to the Inner City
Witness NN.
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), offspring of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, descendant of Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria —
Concerning the news of the king, my lord, I have heard that he is in Babylon. I shall write to the king, my lord, as soon as I have more information.
... these ...
The king, my lord, should ask the chief eunuch about the matter. He knows that I am a dog of the king, my lord, and that I am loyal to the king, my lord.
If the moon at its appearance wears a crown: the king will reach the highest rank; the land will dwell as if in pastures near the city.
Because you have not sent me the ... of the king, my lord, and because you have not sent me the ... of the crown prince, my lord, I have sent you ... , your ... , your ... , your ... , your ... , your ... , your ... , your ... , your ... , your ... , your ... , your ... , your ... , your ... , your ... , your ... , your ... , your ... , your ... , your ... , your ... , your ... , your ... , your ... , your ... , your ... , your ... , your ... , your ... , your ... , your ... ,
in the charge of Ahu-duri, ... of the crown prince.
... the 'finger' is abnormally small...
Good health to the king, my lord!
The Pleiades (are equivalent to) the Scales; they are ... in the constellation Aries.
... regular offerings
Witness Sukkaya.
12 shekels of silver, capital, belonging to Barruqu, at the disposal of Zababa-eriba, son of Bel-lu-balaṭ.
Concerning the news of the son of Yakin: he is in Babylon. He has not set out for Elam but has turned back from the city of Laqû and is staying in Babylon. The king, my lord, should send a letter to me concerning the news of the son of Yakin. He should not be afraid but should come out and enter the forts of the king, my lord.
(As for) Umman-menanu (Ḫumban-menanu), the king of the land Elam who had spoken insolent word(s) on account of the cutting off of the head of Teumman — which a low-ranking soldier of my army had cut off — and his brothers, his family, (and) the seed of his father’s house, together with eighty-five nobles of the land Elam who march at his side, who had flown away from the weapons of (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar —
Witness Šarru-lu-dari, cohort commander.
1 house, 2 ... ,
2 tureens of bouillon;
adjoining the orchard of the house of Ki-amu,
Adad-bani ...
3, in the charge of Banaya-aplu,
Month ... , 19th day, eponym year of Šarru-nuri.
Bel-lu-balaṭ, ... ; Mar-suri, farmer, and his people;
Ashur-taklak,
1 lamb, 10 collared birds, 10 jars of wine.
You are a hero, you are a warrior, you are a virile lion.
... you ...
The base of the middle 'finger' of the lung is 'loose.'
I have now written to you: if you do not wish to ... , do not ... but send your ... s to me.
10 ... ;
What else? Let them ask me!
Nabû-zeru-iddina ... ,
... this ...
The king's word to the commander-in-chief: I am well; you can be glad.
News of the son of Yakin: he is in Babylon.
We shall send the son of Zababa-iddina to the king, my lord, and he will tell the king, my lord, how the work is being done.
Witness Nabû'a.
Witness Še... , ...
Witness NN. Witness Aya-ammu.
adjoining the orchard of ...
... in the month of Sivan (III)
1, the chief cupbearer of the House of Aššur;
Adad-eriba, prefect;
in ...
Witness ... -Adad, ...
A tablet of Nabû-nadin-šumi to Nabû-zeru-lešir, my lord. May Nabû and Marduk bless my lord!
I have now written to you; do not be negligent but keep watch over them.
Concerning what the king, our lord, wrote to us: "You are to bring the  ... of the city of Akkad to the king, our lord" — we have brought it  ... , but the ... of the city of Akkad is very much ...
Hither ...
Perhaps the ... official will say: "... " He is a servant of the king, my lord; he ... on ...
He shall pay in the month of ...
... my ... , my ... , my ... !
At that time, the palace of Aššur-rēša-iši, my lord, which Aššur-rabi (I), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Enlil-nārārī, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-uballiṭ (I) (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur, had previously built, had become old and I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I rebuilt (it) from top to
Nabû-šumu-iškun, the šandabakku (governor of Nippur), son of Bēl-šumu-iškun, the šandabakku (governor of Nippur), son of Nabû-zēra-ušabši, the šandabakku (governor of Nippur), son of Nabû-zēra-ušabši, the šandabakku (governor of Nippur), son of Nabû-zēra-uš
... of Ninurta ...
100 ... ,
... , Bel-eṭir, his wife, his two sons, his daughter, his mother, his two servants, ... , a total of 10 persons, servants of NN —
Witness Marduk-šakin-šumi, royal bodyguard.
The king, my lord, should know (this). If he appoints him, he will make a rebellion and cause others to do so.
I have received the tribute of the land of Zakrutu, 10 minas of silver, 10 minas of copper, 10 minas of iron, 10 minas of lead, 10 minas of gold, 10 minas of silver, 10 minas of copper, 10 minas of iron, 10 minas of lead, 10 minas of gold, 10 minas of silver, 10 minas of copper, 10 minas of iron, 10 minas of lead,
The man who wrote to me: "I have heard that you are a servant of the chief treasurer" —
... I have ...
I will not go ...
He shall pay the bread in its original amount in the month of Nisan (I).
Marduk and Zarpanitu
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract, whether these men or their sons or grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Šumma-ilani, his sons and grandsons,
... Ubrî
11th day.
with his people ...
The Urarṭian ... has ... ed the ... of the king, my lord, and ... ed the ... of the crown prince. He has taken the ... of the crown prince and given them to his ... The crown prince is in ...
Performed in Nisan (I).
As to what you wrote to me: "The king, my lord, should send me a sealed order concerning the Itu'eans about whom you wrote to me" — I have now sent you a sealed order concerning them. They are to be with you, and you are to be with them. If they are not with you, you shall seize them and bring them to me. If they are with you, you shall seize the man who is with them and bring him to me. If he is a citizen, he shall pay 10 minas of silver; if he is a foreigner, he shall
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your great divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
At that time, in the reign of Aššur-... , the king, my lord, ... I built a palace in the city Tarbiṣu.
... as the king, my lord,
Witness ... ayu, son of Bel-lu-dari.
Venus is visible in the west in the constellation Aries.
a cup of quinces;
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the troops ...
I have heard that you are angry with me. I am not angry with you. You are my servants. You are the ones who have kept watch over my house and have not sinned against me. You are the ones who have guarded my treaty and oath. You are the ones who have protected my house and my family. You are the ones who have stood by me and made my throne secure.
... in the mouth of ...
... them
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health  to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my  lord!
1 bowl of soup; 1 ditto of soup.
A thigh, a shoulder, outer cuts;
At that time, I made a royal statue of myself and inscribed on it the praise of the heroic deeds that I had done. I erected (it) in the palace of the city Ashdod, which is on the shore of the great sea.
... the king, my lord, ...
Tiglath-pileser, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (I), strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rabi (II) (who was) also strong king, king of the universe, and king of Assyria.
to ...
(As for) Tammarītu, king of the land Elam, who had spoken insolent word(s) on account of the cutting off of the head of Teumman — which a low-ranking soldier of my army had cut off — and his brothers, his family, (and) the seed of his father’s house,
Witness Sama', ditto.
... the governor of Harran
Witness Kiṣir-Aššur, cohort commander.
a 2-seah jar of beer of bruised grain.
... or in the house of ...
... , ditto;
I have heard that ...
from the women ...
... I have given ...
1, ... ,
... the king should ...
which I have seen ...
Palace of Shalmaneser, great king, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), great king, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also great king, strong king, king of the universe, and king of Assyria.
... the king, my lord
... the city of Adari, the land of Qarqar
to the king, my lord, ...
... the troops ...
... , ditto, ditto, the front red, of the country;
If Jupiter comes close to the Bull of Heaven: the king of Akkad will exercise complete dominion; the son of the king will seize the throne; the king of Babylon will die; the king of the Westland will die; the king of the land Elam will die; the king of the land Guti will die; the king of the land Meluḫḫa will die.
... , ...
... the king, my lord, should send me a sealed order concerning the son of Yakin, and I shall send him to the king, my lord.
The king, your father, ...
— On the 14th day the moon is seen with the sun.
of NN, the chariot driver
As to the Aramean about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "You have captured him; what is his news?" — he is in the city of Arrapha, and his messenger is in the presence of the king, my lord.
I will do ...
We shall write to the king, our lord, whatever news there is. The king, our lord, should not be worried about it.
5 (items): copper basins, copper cauldrons, copper washbasins, copper asallu-bowls, copper diqāru-pots, (and) copper qulliu-bowls;
He shall pay at the threshing floor in its original amount in its entirety.
May Bel and Nabû bless the king, my lord! May the king, my lord, keep me alive!
If you should sin against this treaty of the king, your lord, concerning Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, concerning whom he has concluded (this) treaty with you,
Total 1412 — on the 12th day.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why ... ?"
... to the guard ...
2 ditto, 1 seah of bread;
NN;
Now, I have sent 100 (homers of) barley to the cohort commander of the bodyguard of the son of Zababa.
... his people
... I will send ...
Seal of ... , owner of the fields being sold.
Nabû-eriba, servant of Hanunu —
of the troops ...
Witness ... -šarru-ibni.
I have now written to the king, my lord; let the king, my lord, do as he deems best. May the gods of the king, my lord, and the king, my lord himself, keep me alive for long days and years!
... to the king, my lord ... I have sent ... to the king, my lord ...
In the month of Tebet (X), 16th day, eponym year of Šarru-nuri, governor of the city Til-Barsip.
Witness Nabû-šallim, ditto.
Witness Mannu-lu-šalim.
Will he order it or cause others to order it? Will he plot it, or cause others to plot (or) undertake it, or cause others to undertake it? Will he turn to his enemy, or will he turn to his ally?
in ...
... let me see
The palace of Amēl-Marduk, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of the gods.
Month of Sivan (III), 1st day, eponym year of Ša-Nabû-šû (658 B.C.).
As for Aššur-šumu-iddina, the field marshal of the god Aššur, the one who had planned murder against the gods of the city of Babylon, the god Marduk, the great lord, the one who had commanded the destruction of the land of Sumer and Akkad, the one who had plotted evil (deeds) against the gods of the city of Babylon, the one who had planned murder against the god Marduk, the great lord, the one who had commanded the destruction of the land of Sumer and Akkad,
(As for) Hezekiah of the land Judah, who had not submitted to my yoke, I surrounded (and) conquered forty-six of his fortified cities, fortresses, and small(er) settlements in their environs, which were without number, by having ramps trodden down and battering rams brought up, (iv 10') the assault of foot soldiers, sapping, breaching, and siege engines. I brought out of them 200,150 people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules
The king, my lord, should know it.
I captured the city Qarqar, which belonged to Urḫilēnu, the Ḫamatite. I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, and I brought (them) to my city Aššur.
a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
x vineyards in the town of Zizî, in the province of the chief treasurer,
the exorcist ...
... field in exchange for ...
(As for) Aššur-lēʾi, son of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan),
... the woman ...
2 'litres' of midru-bread; 1 seah 1 'litre' of spiced bread.
... the king, my lord, should know it.
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
(As for) the one who alters my inscribed object (and) disrespects my words, may the god Aššur, my lord, overthrow his sovereignty (and) destroy his name (and) his seed from the land.
Of the 24th day, care of Šamaš-bani.
On my eighth campaign, I marched to the land Bīt-Yakīn. In the course of my campaign, I conquered the city Bīt-Imbî, which is on the border of the land Bīt-Yakīn. (v 10) (As for) that city, I destroyed, demolished, (and) burned (it) with fire. I carried off to Assyria its gods, its goddesses, its possessions, (and) its property, (v 15) (as well as) people, young (and
Concerning the order which the king, my lord, gave me,
an estate of x hectares of land adjoining the field of NN, adjoining the field of Nabû-... , adjoining the field of NN, adjoining the field of NN, adjoining the field of NN, adjoining the field of NN, adjoining the field of NN, adjoining the field of NN, adjoining the field of NN, adjoining the field of NN, adjoining the field of NN, adjoining the field of NN, adjoining the field of NN
as the king, my lord, ...
Nabû-dur-qalli, son of A... , ... of the lady Yati-abu.
... x hundred ...
Witness Issar-nadin-apli, scribe.
Just as a snake and a mongoose do not enter the same hole to lie there together but think only of cutting each other's throat, so may you and your women not enter the same room to lie down in the same bed; think only of cutting each other's throats!
The king, our lord, knows that we are servants who keep the watch of the king, our lord. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, our lord!
Ditto by Ištar of Nineveh and Ištar of Arbela!
The heart of the ram is normal...
... one ...
Witness Gisa...
He who in his heart plots evil against me — Erra will call him to account in a bout of plague. He who plots against my life — the goddess Ištar, mistress of war, will call him to account in a bout of plague.
... the house of Anu ...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Nabû-ahhe-eriba or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or any relative of his or any prefect or any governor or any mayor or any city overseer or any village manager or any labour-duty superior of his or any prefect or any governor or any mayor or any city overseer or any village manager or any labour-duty superior of his,
Witness Ilu-šallim.
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, then I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, (ii 5') fortified cities, together with the small(er) settlements in their environs (and) the district of the land Bīt-Barrû in its entirety, and I
... ni, ... ;
The governor ... the son of the chief ...
... of the son of ... , who ... the temple of the goddess Ištar ...
Witness Remut-ili.
The priest of the House of Aššur offers hand-water to the Lady-of-the-Mountain.
... in the land of Akkad ...
they go ...
The king, my lord, can be glad indeed. The king, my lord, should not be concerned about it.
... about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... the god Šamaš ... the god Šamaš ... the god Šamaš ... the god Šamaš ... the god Šamaš ... the god Šamaš ... the god Šamaš ... the god Šamaš ... the god Šamaš ... the god Šamaš ... the god Šamaš ... the god Šamaš ... the god Šamaš ... the god Šamaš ... the god Šamaš ... the god Šamaš ... the god Šamaš ... the god Šamaš ... the god Šamaš
... I have heard that he has gone to ... , and that he has entered the city of ...
... his sons
Nabû-šezibanni,
... to Nabû-šarru-...
Total, of the palace personnel, for the year 1.
to ...
The son of Zerî has ... ed on the ... th of the month ... in the city of Akkad. The king of Babylon has ... ed on the xth of the month ... in the city of Babylon. The king of the land Elam has ... ed on the xth of the month ... in the city of Bīt-Imbî.
Ubru-Nabû, son of Bel-eṭir, servant of Ša-Nabû-šû.
If a snake is seen in a temple: the offerings of that temple will continue for a long time.
Witness Ki-Issar, ...
1 talent of silver, 10 minas of copper, 1 talent of iron, 1 talent of lead, 1 talent of gold, 1 talent of tin, 1 talent of anzahhu, 1 talent of dark-blue wool, 1 talent of blue wool, 1 talent of red wool, 1 talent of black wool, 1 talent of grey wool,
Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
At that time, the temple of the goddess Ištar, mistress of the city Arbela, my mistress, which Aššur-nādin-aḫḫē, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-dān (II) (who was) also vice-regent of the god Aššur, had previously built, had become old and dilapidated. I delineated its area, dug out its foundation pit, rebuilt it from top to bottom, and completed (it). I deposited my
owner of the ... being sold.
Witness NN, cohort commander.
At that time, I made a statue of the goddess Ištar, mistress of the city Arbela, my mistress, and I erected (it) in the city Arbela. I inscribed on it all the mighty victories that I achieved over all of (my) enemies with the support of the goddess Ištar, my mistress.
... which ...
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send me the people of the house of Zakiru whom you took from the house of Bel-eṭir?" — I sent them to the king, my lord, as soon as I heard (of it). Now, if it pleases the king, my lord, let them send them here, and let them bring them into the presence of the king, my lord. I shall send them to the king, my lord, as soon as they return from the presence of the king, my lord.
50 Kushite horses from the palace herald, 100 cavalry mounts from the treasurer, in all 150 horses —
Does your great divinity know it? Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
1, the 'third man' of the chief eunuch;
... he is ...
The land of the Qutu, the land of the Uqumanu,
... ni;
The coils of the colon are 14 in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
a flagon of beer of bruised grain.
... the Anzû-bird
Witness Šarru-šumu-lešir, chief cook.
... I marched to the land Ḫabḫu, which is called Dēr in the language of the land Ḫabḫu. I conquered the city Dēr, the great city, the city of the goddess Ištar, my lady, together with the cities in its environs. I carried off ... together with their great property, the property of the palace, ... , (and) the property of the temple of the goddess Ištar, my lady, and I brought (it) to my city, Aššur.
... the army of the chief eunuch
From Aššur-šumu-iddina, son of the king.
... his ... in the days
Witness Adad-šumu-...
Total, the house of Nabû-šallim.
... in ...
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... 34 horses
they have seized ...
Total, in the town of Aššur-bani, in the district of the town of Sarugi.
a total of 140 horses and 33 mules have come in today.
... they will do ... to me
The ... s of the son of Zerî have not been brought in. What is it  about?
... the land of Sūḫu, the land of Mari ... I received their tribute and ...
... the Urarṭian
From Issar-šumu-ereš.
the lower part ...
... The left of the gall bladder is attached. The middle part is loose...
... ;
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nadin-šumi. Good health  to the king, my lord! The city of Der and the fort are well. The  king, my lord, can be glad indeed.
At that time, I made a decision about the city Ḫatarikka, which is on the border of the city Ḫabruri, which the king, my lord, had conquered. I settled there people from the land Ḫatti that I had conquered. I set a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over them and imposed upon them corvée labor like that of the people of Assyria.
of the king ...
Witness Adad-naṣir, ...
Taboo of Aššur, my lord, (and) Sîn.
... the king, my lord
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
Witness Nabû-...
... there is
The king's word to NN: I am well; you can be glad.
3 bags of sesame;
Witness Isanayu.
... to Marduk-aplu-iddina
NN and his people, ... ,
As to what you wrote to me: "The magnates and the men of Aššur-belu-taqqin have gone to the city of Aššur-belu-taqqin and are staying there" — I am now sending them to you. Let them stay there until the king, my lord, sends me further instructions.
... as ...
The king of Elam ... has ... ed the king of Babylon ...
... I captured and plundered the city ... , which is on the bank of the Tigris River. I captured and plundered the city ... , which is on the bank of the Euphrates River. I captured and plundered the city Ḫazazu, which is on the bank of the Surappu River.
Bel-ila'i,
To the god Marduk, great lord, his lord: Šamaš-rēša-uṣur, governor of Babylon, presented (this object) for the sake of his life.
... Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
On my eighth campaign, I marched to the land Bīt-Yakīn. In the course of my campaign, I conquered the city Bīt-Imbî, which is on the border of the land Bīt-Yakīn. (v 10) I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, and I brought (them) to my city Aššur.
Witness NN, scribe.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
... of ...
(As for) a city ruler who did not submit to me, I conquered (and) plundered that city. I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, then I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, (ii 15') fortified cities, together with the small(er) settlement
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: good for Akkad, bad for the Westland.
... in the presence of the king ...
Ki-il,
and the ... s of the queen mother have not been able to go out.
Witness Riba-ahhe.
Month of Iyyar (II), 1st day, eponym year of Kanunayu,
From Aššur-iddin ...
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, ...
From Balasî.
... who ... ed in the presence of Aššur-belu-taqqin, saying: "... in the presence of Aššur-belu-taqqin ... "
I have been told that the son of Nabû-ušabši has gone to the Palace. I have not heard any news about him yet.
Perhaps my lord will say: "Why did you not remind me?"
May Marduk, the great lord, the sage of the gods, the one who knows everything, look upon this work with pleasure and may a good word for me be set upon his lips!
Zar-Issar, son of Ahu-duri, ...
... the city ...
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria: facing (brick) of the well of the temple of the divine Sebetti.
... you ...
in all x persons, at the disposal of Kiṣir-... , the ... of the lady of Nineveh.
Witness Šumma-Adad. Witness Ahu-qum.
... son of Yakin, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (I), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Mutakkil-Nusku (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of Aššur:
10 homers of barley, 10 homers of sesame, 10 homers of chick-peas, 10 homers of ordinary lentils, 10 homers of ordinary lentils for the royal table, 10 homers of ordinary lentils for the magnates, 10 homers of ordinary lentils for the cupbearers, in all 10 homers of ordinary lentils for the palace and the magnates.
The palace of Adad-nārārī, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-dān (II), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Tiglath-pileser (II) (who was) also vice-regent of the god Aššur: ...
Witness Šumma-ilani, servant of the governor of Nineveh.
As to what you wrote to me: "... the land of Akkad ... the land of Elam ... the land of Gambulu ... the land of ... the land of Ḫilmu ... the land of Pillatu ... the land of Ḫupapanu ... the land of Bīt-Ḫamban ... the land of Bīt-Zualza ...
As to what you wrote to me: "...
I received gold (and) shining silver sling straps as their wrist-trappings (and) slashed off their belts with sharp swords. I took away gold (and) silver (decorated) belt-daggers as their waist-trappings.
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, chariot driver.
... I will give
The coils of the colon are 16 in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
... the base of the 'finger' is 'loose.'
The chariot-driver of the king, my lord, is a servant of the king, my lord. He is a servant of the king, my lord, who is loyal to the king, my lord. He is a servant of the king, my lord, who is loyal to Assyria. He is a servant of the king, my lord, who is loyal to the house of his lords. He is a servant of the king, my lord, who is loyal to the king, my lord, and who has seen the ... of the king, my lord. He is a servant of the king, my lord
... the sheikh ...
The lower part is elevated ...
a cup of quinces;
10 talents 17 minas of red wool ... ;
— Jupiter stood there one month over its period.
... Basu'a ...
The path of the Anu stars is the path of the Enlil stars; the path of the Pleiades is the path of the Ea-stars.
NN, his son, ...
3 ... ;
I engraved on large limestone slabs (images of) the enemy settlements that I had conquered. I surrounded their (the palace rooms’) lower courses (with them and) made (them) an object of wonder.
The base of the 'finger' is 'loose.'
I, Nabonidus, the humble (and) submissive one who reveres the great gods, the one who is attentive to the will of the gods, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of the gods, the one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, the one who is assiduous towards the rites of the great gods, the one who is attentive to the will of the gods, the one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, the one who is assiduous towards the rites of the great gods, the one who is
(As for) the one who alters my inscribed object (and) disrespects my words, may the goddess Ištar, mistress of ... , ...
or their sons, or their grandsons,
And if you should sin against this treaty, and not do justice to the other party,
I have been told that the son of Ubru-Nabû has gone to the Palace. I have sent my messenger to him, but he has not agreed to come. The king, my lord, should ask him why he refuses to come.
I have sent ...
The palace of the god Enlil, the great lord, the god Marduk, the sage of the gods, the god Nabû, the scribe of everything, the god Nannāru, the lord of the crown, the god Sîn, the lord of the lunar disk, the god Šamaš, the judge of heaven and underworld, the god Adad, the canal inspector of heaven and underworld, the god Ninurta, the warrior of the gods, the god Nergal, the perfect one, the god Nusku, the bearer of the holy s
After I had finished the work on my palace, I invited inside it the god Aššur, the great lord, (and) the gods and goddesses living in Assyria, and (then) I made splendid offerings and presented my gift(s). I made fine oil from olives and aromatics. At the inauguration of the palace, I had the heads of the subjects of my land drenched (and) I watered their insides with sweet wine.
Witness Hur-waṣu.
The troops of the Cimmerians have set out towards Bit-Hamban ...
... to the king ...
... they will seize
At that time, the wall of the temple of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, which is in Nineveh, which Aššur-dān (I), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Tiglath-pileser (I), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (I), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-rabi (I), vice-regent of the god Ašš
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
a basket of (mixed) fruit.
Zizî,
... the chief ...
an estate of 1 hectare of land adjoining Mannu-ki-Arbail, adjoining the field of Kusu,
from the 20th of this month ...
... I have not yet received the ... of the ... s of the city of ... ; they are bringing them to me from the Palace.
... in ...
... as I said to you
... I have ... ed ... , saying: "Let them give me ... , so I can ... the ... s."
If Venus becomes visible in the month of Araḫsamna: the flood will come and irrigate the fields.
of the days ...
I am (now) sending to the king, my lord, one of the servants of Aššur-belu-taqqin, the prefect appointed in the service of the king, my lord, whom the king, my lord, sent to me. He is a competent scribe, useful to the king, my lord. I am also sending to the king, my lord, one of the servants of Aššur-belu-taqqin, the prefect appointed in the service of the king, my lord, who is useful to the king, my lord.
... the rest of his brothers
To the king, my lord: your servant Gabbu-ana-Aššur.
Land of Sūḫu
the people of the house of ...
Witness ... ayu.
... Nabû-šarru-uṣur
1 seah 1 'litre' of regular offering loaves;
... Venus is bright and stands in the west.
Nergal-šallim, his wife, his 2 sons, a total of 4;
adjoining the orchard of the son of Zababa-šallim,
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Month Iyyar (II), 5th day, eponym year of Banbâ.
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
The blood of the heart is normal.
Witness Nabû-zeru-uṣur.
To the king, my lord: your servant Mannu-ki-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord! The king's land and district are well.
3 talents of copper, 1 talent of tin, 1 talent of iron, 1 talent of lead, 1 talent of gold, 1 talent of silver, 1 talent of bronze, 1 talent of iron, 1 talent of tin, 1 talent of anzahhu, 1 talent of dark-blue wool, 1 talent of blue wool, 1 talent of red wool, 1 talent of black wool, 1 talent of grey wool,
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have seen fear and terror at night, or jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
... the Itu'eans
or through lack (of soldiers), or through ... ,
20, the scholars in the service of the king;
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: good for Akkad, bad for Elam and the Westland.
... the god Aššur, my lord, ... I marched to the land Bīt-Ḫamban. I received the tribute of the city rulers of the land Bīt-Ḫamban. I marched to the land Bīt-Barrūa. I received the tribute of the city rulers of the land Bīt-Barrūa. I marched to the land Bīt-Zualza. I received the tribute of the city rulers of the land Bīt-Zualza.
The palace of Tiglath-pileser ... king of Assyria ... son of Aššur-rēša-iši (I), king of Assyria ...
May a later prince restore it. May he restore my inscribed name to its place. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
The king, my lord, knows that I am a poor man. I have no oxen, no hectares of land, no orchards, no wells, no springs, no water-place, no cistern, no irrigation ditch, no seed-corn, no grain, no barley, no sesame, no peanuts, no pomegranates, no grapes, no wine, no beer, no wine, no oil, no honey, no ghee, no oil, no wax, no wool, no linen, no ... ,
Concerning the work on the river about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send me a detailed report?" — I have now sent to the king, my lord, a detailed report on the work on the river which I have been doing.
... the king, your lord, ...
The troops of the Cimmerians and the troops of the Scythians have set out towards Bit-Hamban and are marching on. The king, my lord, should know (this).
From Nergal-šumu-uṣur.
I sent a eunuch of mine, the chief eunuch, to the city Tyre. I received from Metenna of the city Tyre (and) from Sanda-šarme of the city Ṣidon a large payment, (namely) a talent of gold (and) a talent of silver.
... from the mouth of
... much ...
The god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises. He made all of the black-headed (people) from the Upper Sea of the Setting Sun to the Lower Sea of the Rising Sun bow down at my feet. Thus did recalcitrant rulers come to fear battle with me. While they were abandoning their settlements, (ii 5') they flew away alone like bats (living) in crevices to inaccessible place(s
... upon him
He is in the presence of Aššur-šumu-iddina.
care of Aššur-na'id, my ...
Mukin-zeri ...
When the king, my lord, sat on the throne, I sent my servants to the Palace, saying: "Go and tell the king, my lord, how it is."
Witness Issar-duri.
Nabû-eṭir, chief cupbearer, has contracted and bought him from Bel-duri for 1 1/2 minas of silver.
And as for you, praise me! Let me see your good deeds, let me hear your good words, let me see your good deeds, let me hear your good words, let me see your good deeds, let me hear your good words! May I see your good deeds, may I hear your good words!
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
... the people of Assyria ...
The palace of Aššur-dān (II), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tiglath-pileser (II), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria.
1,800 (homers) of barley, 1,200 (homers) of wheat, 1,200 (homers) of sesame, 1,200 (homers) of (mixed) kernels, 1,200 (homers) of (mixed) pomegranates, 1,200 (homers) of (mixed) dates, 1,200 (homers) of (mixed) olives, 1,200 (homers) of (
The middle of the 'path' is effaced ...
... ;
... Dadî, the ...
... Ahu-duri
... the elders
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Eltekeh (and) Tamnâ. I approached the city Ekron and I killed the governors (and) nobles who had committed crime(s) and hung their corpses on towers around the city; I counted the citizens who had committed (ii 10) the criminal acts as booty; (and) I commanded that the rest of them be allowed to go free. I counted as booty the people, young (and) old, who had committed crime(s) or sin(s) and had no mercy on
Remanni-Adad, chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, has contracted and bought him from these gentlemen for one mina of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
I have heard that he has gone to ...
I am Marduk, I am Zarpanitu.
2 sheep, 2 bowls (of wine),
Witness NN, commander-in-chief of the chief eunuch.
Month Elul (VI), 13th day.
Now, ever since the king, our lord, appointed us, we have been keeping the watch of the king, our lord, and serving the crown prince.
As to what I wrote to the king, my lord: "The king, my lord, should ask the chief scribe about the matter" — he has told me as follows:
I marched to the land Bīt-Ḫamban, which had rebelled against me. I captured the cities Bīt-Ḫamban, Bīt-Ḫamban-apli, Bīt-Ḫamban-apli-ša-Zabdāni, Bīt-Ḫamban-apli-ša-Zabdāni-šumu-iddina, Bīt-Ḫamban-apli-ša-Zabdāni-šumu-idd
To the king, my lord: your servant, Aššur-alik-pani. May Aššur, Sin, Šamaš, Bel, and the great gods of heaven and earth bless the king, my lord.
I have now written to my lord ... ; my lord should do as he deems best. I have now written to my lord twice, but my lord has not given me any orders.
As to the Arameans about whom my lord wrote to me: "... 300 of them have come in" — I have received them and am herewith sending them to my lord.
... you will conquer
I marched to the land of the Qumānu, who live in the mountains, difficult terrain. I conquered the city Qumānu, together with the cities in its environs, which are on the border of the land of the Qumānu. I conquered the city Qumānu, together with the cities in its environs, which are on the border of the land of the Qumānu. I conquered the city Qumānu, together with the cities in its environs, which are on the border of the land of the Qumānu. I
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
As to the news of the son of Yakin, he is in Babylon. He has not yet set out, he is still there. The king, my lord, should know (this).
... 1 1/2 'litre',
The 'well-being' is destroyed. The left of the gall bladder is attached.
Witness NN, Hatarakka. Witness NN.
Ashur-bunaya,
... the base of the middle part is 'loose.'
... to you ...
(As for) the one who alters my inscribed object (and) disrespects my words, who does evil against my deeds, may the god Aššur, my lord, overthrow his sovereignty; may he destroy his name (and) his seed from the land; may he make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the land and have no pity on him. May he (the god Aššur) make his name (and) his seed disappear from the land and have no pity on him.
From Ašaredu.
... the king, my lord, ...
I have received the chariots of the ... s, but the ... s of the magnates have not yet arrived.
... the woman Yabibê ...
Witness NN.
... the deputy
At that time, I marched to the land Ḫabḫu, which had rebelled against me. I conquered the cities Bīt-Imbî, Bīt-Kilamzaḫ, Ḫardišpu, (and) Bīt-Kubatti, their fortified cities. I carried off their booty, possessions, (and) property, (as well as) their gods (and) their goddesses). I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire their cities. I turned (them) into mounds and ru
... The heart of the ram is normal...
adjoining the field of Šulmu-beli, ...
... ;
an estate of x hectares ... ,
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), offspring of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, descendant of Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, favorite of the great gods, wise prince, shepherd of the people of Assyria and the people of the land of Sumer and Akkad, I, the circumspect king who sees everything
To the king, my lord: your servant Bel-le'i. Good health to the king, my lord!
let ...
The god Adad released his rains (and) the god Ea opened up his springs. Grain was five cubits high in its furrow (and) ear(s) of corn were five-sixths of a cubits long. (i 5') The great gods granted me a broad mind (and) allowed my mind to learn all of the scribal arts.
To Aššur-iddin, the ... ,
Witness Šulmu-šarri.
1 bag of sesame; 3 ditto of (mixed) kernels.
500 (homers) wheat ...
Witness Tuqunu-ereš, merchant.
I marched to the land Bīt-Ḫamban, which is in the midst of the sea. I conquered the city Bīt-Ḫamban, together with the cities in its environs, which are on the shore of the sea. I captured Šūzubu, their king, a rogue (and) outlaw, who did not respect the oath of the lord of lords (and) who plotted evil (deeds) against the people of Assyria. I carried off his booty, together with the people of his land, his gods
Witness Banî, deputy of the chief physician.
eponym year of Kanunayu, treasurer.
Witness Ubru-Nabû, from the town of Upa.
... the 'bishop'
has gone ...
Witness Zarutî, chariot driver of the crown prince.
he should ...
... let them do
Whoever ... , the merchant ...
The breast-bone is thick...
... of the sky
100, the scribes, 100, the haruspices, 100, the exorcists, 100, the physicians, 100, the augurs, 100, the diviners, 100, the scholars, 100, the scribes, 100, the haruspices, 100, the exorcists, 100, the physicians, 100, the augurs, 100, the diviners,
a 2-seah jar of Assyrian budê-confection;
... have been erased
... I have been sent to the vizier, my lord
... 5 ironsmiths
... of oxen
Total, 2: the palace herald.
... to the king ...
... my ...
I have ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... the town of Dūr-Šamaš-rēša-uṣur
... the palace in the town of Šabirešu
... s of the upper and lower part ...
... the oxen, the sheep and the ...
The son of Sadir has seized the house of his father's house, but has not yet received his share.
I am now sending him to the king, my lord. He is a competent haruspex, useful to the king, my lord. He has read the extispicy omens and has studied the series.
... oxen, total 100.
And the son of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), who had fled to me and had grasped my feet, I brought him into the city Dēr.
This (refers to) that the 1st day is good, (but) the month is bad.
Witness Nanî, horse trainer of Nabû-šarru-uṣur.
When you are to strew salt before Gula in the steppe, you say: “Gula, accept life!”
or a ... , or a ... , or a donkey driver, or a chariot driver, or a 'third man,'
Total, the offerings of ...
... of ...
... as if he did not ...
The god Aššur, father of the gods, king of the gods, the one who decrees fates, the one who dwells in Eḫursaggalkurkurra, the great mountain, his lordly abode, who decrees destinies, who decrees fates, who dwells in Eḫursaggula, the great mountain, his lordly abode, who decrees destinies, who dwells in Eḫursaggula, the great mountain, his lordly abode, who dwells in Eḫursaggula, the great mountain, his lordly abode
the town of Sin-na'id ...
Witness Qanuni, eunuch.
To the king, my lord: your servant Issar-šumu-ereš. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
and (whether) they will attack, kill, plunder, loot, and take away (from him) his life, his family, his offspring, his country, and his throne.
A tablet of Nabû-ušabši to Nabû-šarru-uṣur, my lord. Good health to my lord! The city of Der and the fort are well.
1, the treasurer of the queen mother;
the land of Bit-Zualza.
2 seahs, the 21st day;
From the Palace Herald.
... they will not give ... in the month of Nisan (I).
The servants of Bel-naṣir, the messenger of the king, my lord, have ... ed the ... of the king, my lord, and are ... ing the ... of the king, my lord. The ... of the king, my lord, ... the ... of the ... of the king, my lord.
(As for) the city Ušqaya, which is in the district of the land Bīt-Zualza, (and) which had not submitted to me, I conquered it by means of the assault of my fierce battle. I carried off from it people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats, which were without number.
(As for) the one who alters my inscribed object (and) disrespects my words, may the god Aššur, the great lord, glare at him angrily and determine a bad fate for him! May he make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the land and have no pity on him!
Mušezib-Aššur,
Witness Šamaš-ahu-iddina, scribe.
a cup of small onions; a ditto of quinces;
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, ask him what he has to say.
I have now written to you; do not be negligent but keep watch over them until I have heard more.
... he will do
Sam'al
Month Iyyar (II), 15th day, eponym year of Nabû-duru-uṣur.
As to what you wrote to me: "The messenger of Urpala'a came to me, saying: 'Aššur-belu-taqqin has written to me: 'The king of Assyria is marching against me. You must come and stay with me until I have gathered the people of my land and we shall go and enter (the Palace) together'" —
I am a dead dog, I am a dog who fears the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, revive me!
4 (of) Seal of lamentation priest,
From Bel-le'i, the chief singer.
Now, I have ... to the king, my lord.
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-reṣuwa. Good health to the king, my lord!
Sasî, the ... of the son of Yakin, has contracted and bought him from NN, the son of the scribe of the palace, for 100 sheep.
at the disposal of ...
We shall do as the king, our lord, wrote to us.
11 houses ...
the governor ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send me the ... of the city of ... ?"
... he will not be able to do battle with him. He will not be able to stand in the face of the fierce weapons of the god Aššur.
an estate of 2 hectares of land adjoining the field of Ahu-duri, adjoining the road to Calah,
what I ...
Witness Nabû-aplu-...
... the king's word to the chief ... : "... the ... of the city of ... "
the ... s to ...
If he appoints him, as long as he holds this position, will he instigate an insurrection and rebellion against Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, and Assurbanipal, the crown prince of the Succession Palace?
... which they bring to the king ... , saying: "You are a strong king.
May Aššur, lord of the gods, ... make his name, his seed, his offspring, and his progeny disappear from the land and clothe his body with leprosy like a garment.
I asked ...
Witness NN, commander-in-chief.
Seal of Sasî, owner of the ... being sold.
(As for) the palace of the city Gaza, which Sennacherib, king of Assyria, had built, I destroyed (it) and turned (it) into ruins.
1 basket of (mixed) fruit. 3 litres of wine.
... I will send to the temple
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-ṣil-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
The palace of Nabû-šar-aḫḫēšu, king of Babylon, the one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of the great gods, am I:
To the 'farmer,' my lord: your servant Aššur-belu-taqqin. Good health to the 'farmer,' my lord! The land of the 'farmer,' my lord, is well; the mood of the land is very good. The king, my lord, can be glad indeed.
Aššur-rešuwa, single; Šumma-ussezib, single; Aššur-šallim-Aššur, single; Aššur-šumu-lešir, single;
... i, ...
... to our ears ...
you will ... before ...
... the heart of ...
The money is paid completely. That field is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Sargon (II), appointee of the god Enlil, nešakku-priest of the god Aššur, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, wise prince, shepherd of the people of Assyria and of the land of Sumer and Akkad, I:
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
At that time, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me so that I mustered my numerous troops and ordered the march to the land Bīt-Yakīn. In the course of my campaign, I defeated Šūzubu (Nergal-ušēzib), a Chaldean who lives in the marshes, at the city Bittūtu. As for him, terror of doing battle with me fell upon him and his heart pounded.
... he shall pay the full price of the house.
He performs the sheep offerings before the Lady-of-the-Mountain.
... , ... ;
Total, of the son of Yakin, chief eunuch.
The messengers of the magnates of the Palace, who are bringing the horses to the Palace, are 10 in number. They are accompanied by the messenger of the governor of Arrapha.
Witness NN, ... of the field.
From ... ya.
... he sent ... and ... He sent ... , saying: "... the son of ... "
... the servant who ...
... his ... and his people
Adad-mušammer,
The king should ask the chief scribe.
Witness Dadî, ditto.
The base of the middle part is 'loose.' The 'finger' is thick...
... I will not let you go out ...
Witness Marduk-šallim, chariot driver.
If the moon is surrounded by a halo, and the sun stands in it: the king of all lands will exercise supreme power.
Concerning the field in the town of Ṭab-šar-Sin about which my lord wrote to me, I have cultivated it and harvested it. I have also cultivated the field in the town of Ṭab-šar-Nabû about which my lord wrote to me.
... , Ammon;
I seized the chariots, horses, ... , (and) mules that he had abandoned in the thick of battle.
... the elders
If Jupiter is black: the king of Akkad will become strong and overthrow his enemies.
and the city of Akkad, which ...
And as to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "The magnates have told me that you are a servant who is loyal to his lord" — I am a servant who is loyal to his lord. May the magnates and the lord of kings, my lord, see my deeds and may I see their reward!
And concerning the work on the river about which you wrote to me: "We shall do it together" — do it yourselves, do it your brothers'selves, do it as you wish!
I have now written to you; do not be negligent but keep watch over them until I send you further instructions.
15 wooden pigeons;
... the king, my lord, wrote to me: "The king's subjects should not be exempt."
The palace of Nabû-šumu-līšir, the Dakkurian, the ... of the god Marduk, the ... of the goddess Zarpanītu, the ... of the god Nabû, the ... of the goddess Tašmētu, the ... of the god Nannāru, the ... of the goddess Uṣuramāssu, the ... of the goddess Nanāya, the ... of the goddess Ištar of Uruk, the ... of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, the
... to ...
... the city of ... I captured ... I carried off ... together with their possessions, their property, their herds, their flocks, their goods, their possessions, (and) their gods.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Nabû-rehtu-uṣur or his sons or his grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Bel-naṣir and his sons,
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... to the son of Ašipâ
... I have sent ... to you; if ...
Aššur-iddin, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Ashurbanipal, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Esarhaddon, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Sennacherib, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Sargon (II), vice-regent of Aššur, son of the great gods, who provides for her,
Witness Mar-šarri-ilani, servant of the chief scribe.
From Nergal-eṭir.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "What is the news of the son of Yakin?" — he is in Babylon.
The king's subjects who are in the service of the magnates and the prefects, the exempts, the recruits, the exempts of the chief cupbearer, the exempts of the treasurer, the exempts of the chief judge, the exempts of the chief scribe,
If a planet comes close to the star of the king, the king will exercise complete dominion; the king will become strong and have no rival; the king will rule the land of his enemy; the king will achieve his desire; the king will attain old age; the king will see the grandchildren of his land grow old; the king will become happy; the gods will remember Akkad favorably.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
saying, "...
Witness Bel-...
Witness Nabû-bani, royal bodyguard.
I brought ... to Assyria. I settled 5,000 captives of the city Bīt-Imbî in the city Kār-Nergal. I settled 5,000 captives of the city Bīt-Zualza in the city Kār-Tukulti-Ninurta. I settled 5,000 captives of the city Bīt-Barrūa in the city Kār-Sîn. I settled 5,000 captives of the city Bīt-Zatti in
... have been done
This is its interpretation.
and the woman Nanî, his mother,
I brought Dunānu (and) his brothers out of that city alive. I brought out his wife, his sons, his daughters, his (palace) women, male singers, (and) female singers and I counted (them) as booty. I brought out silver, gold, property, (and) the treasures of his palace and I counted (them) as booty. I brought out eunuchs, his attendants, engineers, (and) his food preparers and I counted (them) as booty. (v 15) I brought out all of
If the moon at its appearance is seen in a cloud: the flood will come.
Since the king, my lord, wrote to me: "You are to bring the people of the land of Akkad into the fortified places" — I have brought them into the fortified places of the king, my lord. I have appointed ... eunuchs of mine as provincial governors over them.
1 prayer bowl ditto;
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord! May Bel and Nabû bless the king, my lord! May they sate the king, my lord, with old age and fullness of life! May they keep firm the foundations of the royal throne of the king, my lord, until far-off days!
Witness NN, chief judge.
1,000 (homers) wheat of the ...
1,000, 1,000 — the commander-in-chief;
The night of the 14th day, the moon ... the sun ...
at the disposal of Mudammiq-Issar,
10 cavalry mounts,
(As for) Umman-menanu (Ḫumban-menanu), the king of the land Elam who had come to the aid of the Babylonians, I marched to his land. I surrounded, conquered, plundered, destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire his fortified cities, his treasury, and the small(er) settlements in their environs.
The king, my lord, should ask the scribe of the palace.
... you did not ...
Two homers of wheat in the town of Adallal, belonging to the estate of the palace herald,
If the top of the left surface of the 'finger' is split: defeat of the army. Revolt of the army.
... I sent ... to them, saying: "... I will send you ... " They said: "We will not go ... "
Witness Šulmu-ahhe, ditto.
Month of Tebet (X), 11th day, eponym year of Sin-šarru-uṣur.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
... I have sent ... to the king, my lord. He ... in the presence of the ... official ...
... he will
Witness Ṭab-šar-Sin, scribe.
... of the camp ...
... he ...
1 necklace of ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... ,
the town of Minu' ...
A tablet of the city lord of Akkad to the palace scribe.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments...
You shall not ... against Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, concerning whom he has concluded (this) treaty with you, but you shall guard him and serve him, and he shall exercise the kingship and lordship over you.
Witness Nergal-šarru-uṣur, commander of ...
of the woman Aya-...
... the house of ...
3,000, the exorcists;
the governor ...
... the king, my lord
... of the king ...
1 homer, Amu-bunaya,
I completed the work on Esagil which my father who had engendered me had not finished. I (re)confirmed the regular offerings for Esagil and the gods of Babylon. I (re-)established the privileged status of Babylon (and) appointed Šamaš-eriba, my favorite brother, to the kingship of Babylon in order that the strong might not harm the weak. I (re-)established the privileged status of the citizens of Babylon (and) appointed Šamaš-eriba, my favorite brother, to the kingship of Babylon
May she make you attain your wish! Refrain.
... ni;
... I have heard that he has gone to ...
10 ... ,
... the governors of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari
The palace of Aššur-dān (II), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Tiglath-pileser (II), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (II), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-rabi (II) (who was) also vice-regent of the god Aššur:
The statues of the gods, my lords, I erected in their places.
of the goddess Ištar ...
... he will ... my ...
5 sheaves — Šumma-ilani
... I have now written down their names and am herewith sending them to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should ask them why they ... ed the ... of the king, my lord.
... of Marduk-šumu-uṣur
The king, my lord, knows that the governor has a lot to say. He is a servant who is loyal to his lord. He is a servant who is devoted to his lord. He is a servant who is trustworthy to his lord. He is a servant who is reliable to his lord.
The king, my lord, should not be afraid of this eclipse! The gods of the king, my lord, have provided good fortune for the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should not be worried.
... the Itu'eans, the Gurumeans, the Itu'eans of the Palace, the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ...
And if you should sin against this treaty of his, and he should hear of it, may he not hold back but come and report it to him, and may he ... and ... as he deems best.
I captured the city ... , which belonged to Urḫilēnu, the Ḫamatite. I carried off his booty, possessions, property, (and) his wife.
or a ... , or a ... , or a ... , or a ... , or a ... , or a ... , or a ... , or a ... , or a ... , or a ... , or a ... , or a ... , or a ... , or a ... , or a ... , or a ... , or a ... , or a ... , or a ... , or a ... ,
The palace of Aššur-dān (II), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tiglath-pileser (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria.
Palace of Aššur-dān (II), great king, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tiglath-pileser (II), great king, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (II) (who was) also great king, strong king, king of the universe, and king of Assyria.
adjoining the field of NN,
Concerning the ... about which you wrote, I have asked the chief of the accounts.
I asked ...
Witness Ninuaya, ...
because ...
Total 19 gods of the House of Aššur.
Witness Aplu-uṣur.
a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
I have sent my scribe to the Palace. He will bring him in.
NN, royal bodyguard;
Concerning the oxen about which my lord wrote to me: "Why did you not send them?"
From Nabû-šuma-iškun.
Total, of the estate of Yasubaya.
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
Witness Marduk-eriba, witness Aššur-zeru-ibni.
On my return march, I defeated all together the Tu­ʾu­mu­na, Riḫiḫu, Yadaqqu, Ubudu, Gibrê, (i 55) Gurumu, Ubulu, Damunu, Gambulu, Ḫindaru, Ruʾuʾa, Pu­qu­du, Ḫamrānu, Ḫa­ga­rā­nu, Nabatu, (and) Liʾtaʾu, insubmissive Arameans. I carried off into
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health  to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my  lord! May Aššur, Sin, Šamaš, Bel and Nabû ... to the king, my  lord!
... Aššur-šumu-ukin
Šamaš-šumu-ukin has contracted and bought him from Hana-kiṣir for 1 1/2 minas of silver.
Adad-nārārī, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-dān (II), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Tiglath-pileser (II) (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur:
... I will do
If the Pleiades come close to the top of the moon and stand there: the great gods will make a favorable decision about the land.
and ...
Witness Azi-... , ...
Nabû-šuma-iškun, the king of Babylon, who had put his trust in the king of the land Elam, saw the assault of my mighty battle array and abandoned the city Bīt-Imbî, a city that was a lordly residence of his, and (then) he fled to the city Dūr-Yakīn. He entered that city and (thereby) saved his life. I seized that city (and) I counted (it) as booty. I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire that city.
5 talents of silver, 5 talents of gold, 5 talents of tin, 5 talents of iron, 5 talents of lead, 5 talents of copper, 5 talents of anzahhu,
You shall not change nor alter the word of Aššur-nerari, king of Assyria, but serve this very Assyrian king, your lord, and his sons and grandsons, your lords, with loyalty and truth. You shall not revolt against him nor do anything to him which is not good. You shall not seize the throne of Assyria for yourself but serve this very Assyrian king, your lord, and his sons and grandsons, your lords, with truth and justice.
May the gods of heaven and earth turn water (and) oil into a curse for you, may they destroy your seed and your offspring from the land.
1 talent, in ... , for ... ;
in all 6 witnesses from Babilayu.
in all 34 talents of copper ... , of the town of ...
The governor of the land of Sūḫu, the governor of the land of Mari, the governor of the land of Bīt-Zualza, the governor of the land of Bīt-Kapsi, the governor of the land of Bīt-Sangibūti, the governor of the land of Bīt-Urzakki, the governor of the land of Bīt-Kapsi, the governor of the land of Bīt-Zualza, the governor of the land of Bīt-Sangibūti, the governor of the land
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-šar-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord!
the son of Daltâ ...
which ...
... I have sent ... to the Palace. The king, my lord, should ask him.
... they should come
saying: "Why ...
or the chariot-horse-trainer(s), ... ,
The money is paid completely. That field is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The palace of Sargon, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods:
the king's ...
If the king, my lord, orders, I shall send them to the king, my lord.
... the son of Zeru-ibni
... one ...
... as I ...
The 'cavity' of the left lung is split...
The 30th day, which they call the Silence: they cast Qingu and his forty sons.
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-alik-pani. Good health to the king, my lord!
As to what you wrote to me: "I have heard that you have sent a letter to the son of Yakin, telling him to come and stay with you" — I have indeed sent such a letter to the son of Yakin, but he has not yet come and stayed with me.
2 cuts of shoulders. Of 1 ox: the stomach, the liver, the kidneys, the heart.
Month of Tebet (X), 25th day, eponym year of Ašipâ.
... s of Nabû-ahhe-... , chief ...
Sin-šarru-uṣur, ... ; Sin-šarru-ibni, ... ; Bel-... , ... ;
The breast-bone is thick...
From Aššur-šumu-uṣur.
... from the beginning of my reign ...
... I marched to the land of the Qumānu. I conquered the city Qumānu, together with the cities in its environs. I massacred their people, carried off captives from them, razed, destroyed, (and) burned their cities. I turned around (lit. “I turned the front of my yoke”) and returned safely to Assyria.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
3 (cuts of) meat, 1 per day,
Witness Šarru-lu-dari.
At that time, I marched to the land Ḫabḫu, which had rebelled against me. I conquered the cities Bīt-Imbî, ... , Bīt-Zualza, (and) Bīt-Zualzi, their fortified cities. I carried off their booty, possessions, (and) property, (as well as) their gods (and) their goddesses). I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire their cities. I turned (them) into mounds and ruins. I took the people of the
in the town ...
shall place 10 minas of silver and one mina of gold in the lap of Ištar of Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
a total of 13 Kushite horses and 13 cavalry mounts — all 26 horses and mules ... —
with the land of ...
Witness NN, scribe of the crown prince.
To the goddess Ištar, mistress of the gods, his lady: Sargon (II), king of the world, viceroy of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, presented (this object) for the sake of his life, for the well-being of his offspring, and for the overthrow of his enemies.
... -naṣir, the priest of Bel, has contracted and bought him from ... for x minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
... this ...
NN, 1 ox, 10 jars of wine,
The moon will complete the day in Adar (XII).
(As for) the one who alters my inscribed object (and) disrespects my words, who does evil against me (and) my offspring, may the goddess Ištar, supreme lady, glare at him angrily and make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the lands! May she have no pity on him forever!
... to the ... of Bel
The chariot-driver brings in the whip of the crown prince and the whip of the magnates, places them before the crown prince, and says: “The crown prince is the son of Aššur-bēl-nišēšu.”
2 minas of silver, the woman Bissunu;
I have heard that ...
of the fort ...
17 homers of sesame;
Witness Iqišâ, ša šēpi guard.
I roofed them (the palatial halls) with beams of cedar (and) cypress, whose scent is sweet, product(s) of Mount Amanus and Mount Sirāra, the holy mountains. I fastened bands of silver (and) copper on doors of cedar, cypress, juniper, (and) Indian wood and I installed (them) in their gates.
The 'well-being' and the 'path' on the left of the gall bladder are present...
... in the river ...
If he, having planned, sends (him), will he kill what there is to kill, seize what there is to seize, plunder what there is to plunder, loot what there is to loot, and take (away) what there is to take away?
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. May Bel and  Šamaš bless the king, my lord!
I brought out Padî, their king, from the city Ekron and placed (him) on the lordly throne over them, then I imposed upon him payment (in recognition) of my overlordship.
Šulmu-beli-lašme, the chariot-driver of the crown prince, has contracted and bought him from Ubru-Nabû for 1 1/2 minas of silver. He has taken him into his entourage.
The god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises.
... or a ...
... Izbu ...
... of ...
In the course of my campaign, I marched to the land Bīt-Ḫamban, which is in the midst of the sea. (v 10) The people of the land Bīt-Ḫamban, who had not come out and (v 15) inquired about the well-being of my royal majesty, (and) who had not sent their greetings to me, (but) had instead sent their messengers to the land Elam — (v 20) the people of the land Bīt-Ḫamban
... -ili;
the sons of Nadinu and the ...
... tribute ...
Witness Mar-abu.
... not ...
Witness Addî.
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, then I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, (ii 5') fortified cities, together with the small(er) settlements in their environs (and) the district of the land Bīt-Barrû in its entirety, and I
When the king, my lord, was in the Palace in Nineveh, I sent Nabû-... to the king, my lord, saying: "The king, my lord, has ordered me to give you bread and water."
Saturn (is equivalent to) the Scales (and) the moon.
If a planet becomes visible in the middle of a month: there will be floods.
Nergal-uballiṭ, son of Nabû-ahu-uṣur, servant of Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, king of Babylon, has contracted and bought him from Nabû-ahu-uṣur for 10 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
... red, of the port;
Venus became visible in the west in the path of the Enlil stars.
The vertebrae are recessed on the left...
I have now written to you: if you do not wish to disgrace yourself before the god Aššur, my lord, and the goddess Ištar, my lady, and do not wish to disgrace the crown prince, my lord, and the crown prince's family, do not do anything to harm them.
... the king, my lord, ...
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant who is loyal to his lord. I have now written to the king, my lord; let the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
Witness ...
The king, my lord, can be glad.
to not ...
As to what you wrote to me: "The people of Babylon have revolted against him" — if they have revolted against him, why do you keep silent? If you do not keep silent, why do you not seize the hand of the great lord, Marduk? If you do not seize the hand of the great lord, Marduk, why do you not lead the people of Babylon? If you do not lead the people of Babylon, why do you not appoint the one who pleases you?
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-rehtu-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord!
At that time, I made the enemy people whom I had captured carry baskets (of earth) and they made bricks. I had (them) make bricks for a year.
Esarhaddon, king of Assyria! I will vanquish your enemies.
and ...
... what is it that the king, my lord, commands?
To the king, my lord: your servant Balasî. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Witness Nabû-eriba, ditto.
Witness Apladad-abu-uṣur.
4 oxen, 10 hectares of land ...
From Hašanu.
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Adad-šumu-uṣur.
On the 1st day of the month, the day of the watch, I shall send a detailed report to the king, my lord.
Seal of Adad-ahu-iddina, owner of the people being sold.
He shall pay in the month of Nisan (I) in its original amount. If he does not pay, it shall increase by a fourth.
I have not heard ...
saying, "...
A tablet of Zazaya to the palace scribe, my lord. Good health to my lord!
I have now written to you: ... , and ... to your ... , and I have sent ... to the Palace.
... Man(nu)-ki-...
I captured the city ... , together with cities in its environs, and I added (them) to the province of the chief cupbearer. I settled there people from the land Bīt-Sangibūti, which I had conquered.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... the ... official ... the ... official ... the ... official ... " — I have now written to the king, my lord, (about it), but I have not yet received an answer.
Remanni-Adad, chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, has contracted and bought him from these gentlemen for 7 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
Now, the son of Zababa-eriba has seized the people of the town of Aššur-naṣir and settled them in the town of Zababa-eriba.
... of my lord ...
As to the news of the son of Yakin: he is in Babylon. The king, my lord, should ask the messenger of the son of Yakin whether he is in Babylon.
I have been staying in the city of ... , and have been keeping the watch of Aššur-belu-taqqin, my lord. Now, my lord has sent me to the city of Zabban, and I have entered the city of Zabban.
Isana
(As for) any future ruler who repairs its dilapidated section(s but) erases my inscribed name and writes his (own) name, may (the god) Aššur, the great lord, glare at him angrily and determine a bad fate for him! May he make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the land and have no pity on him!
... the king, my lord
If a star flares up and enters the constellation Aries: the flood will come ...
If Venus becomes visible in Sivan (III): the flood will come.
in all, 7 of 12 spans' height;
in all, 6 women.
... the king, my lord, should ask
of the king from ...
... I have not seen ...
Witness Barruqu, city overseer of Nineveh.
to ...
... let him come ...
Now, if it is agreeable to him, let them appoint him to the service of the chief victualler, and let him ... in the king's presence. He should not ... in the presence of the chief victualler, but should ... in the king's presence.
I had a bridge constructed opposite the Citadel Gate (by packing down) paving stones of white limestone for my lordly processions (and) the processions of my lordly offspring.
... I have heard
The 'well-being' is destroyed...
NN and his people, Dadi-iqbi and his people,
If the palace herald ... , the king will exercise complete dominion; the king's land will expand; the king will achieve his desire.
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial audience gift from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
... jars of ... ;
The hand of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, I did not grasp.
... s of ... of his associates
Because the king, my lord, has now summoned me, I am sending to the king, my lord, the following people, servants of the king, my lord, who have been living in the city of Der and the city of Ṣimirra, and have not been able to leave their work: 100 men, 100 donkeys, 100 camels, 100 oxen, 100,000 sheep, 100,000 jars of wine, 100,000 bundles of grapes,
... the palace herald ...
... he ...
... I marched to the land Bīt-Yakīn. He (Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), the king of the land Karduniaš (Babylonia), the one who had not honored my friendship, the one who had sinned against my treaty, the one who had forgotten my kindness, the one who plotted evil (deeds) against me, the one who (re)confirmed the statues of the gods Bēl (Marduk) and Zarpanītu, the gods
... the king, my lord, ... the chariot-driver and the 'third man' of the king, my lord, who ... to the king, my lord, saying: "The king, my lord, has given me orders concerning the chariot-driver and the 'third man' of the king, my lord, saying: 'They are to go with you.'"
If a meteor flashes from east to west and sets: the main army of the enemy will fall in battle.
which Nabû-apal-iddina ...
I captured the city Qarqar, which is on the bank of the Tigris River, and I added (it) to the province of the chief cupbearer. I captured the city Qarqar-šarri-dūr-Aššur, which is on the bank of the Euphrates River, and I added (it) to the province of the chief cupbearer.
Witness Zizî, cohort commander.
... the army of the Elamite ...
As to the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send it to me?" — I sent it to the Palace ...
10 cavalry mounts,
Witness Šepe-Aššur, ...
Now, as to what the king, my lord, wrote to me:
If Adad thunders in the middle of the sun: there will be a fall of Elam in battle.
2 cows of gold; 1, the chief eunuch;
... ;
I am now sending to the king, my lord, the messenger of the city rulers of the cities of the land of Sūḫu, together with their tribute.
Witness Šepe-ahhe.
... the king, my lord, ... I have sent ... to the king, my lord. Now, if the king, my lord, commands, let them send me a sealed order concerning the ... of the son of Ašipâ and the ... of the son of Bel-iddina, and I shall send them to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should not say: "Why did you not send them?" I have sent them to the king, my lord, but the sealed order of the king, my lord, has not yet arrived.
As to the city lords about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send them to me?" — I have now sent them to the Palace. They will stay there until the king, my lord, sends them out.
As to the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let them bring it to you" — I have received it.
... let him ...
Witness Ubbuqu.
(As for) the one who alters my inscribed object (and) disrespects my words, who does evil against me (and) my offspring, may (the god) Aššur, the great mountain, exalt my good reputation (and) make my name (and) my seed endure forever in the land of Sumer and Akkad; may he cause my hands to grasp the righteous scepter that enlarges the land (and) the fierce staff that humbles the unsubmissive; may he allow me to stand over my enemies in victory (and) triumph;
2 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... ,
... Urarṭians ...
After I had finished the work on my palace, I invited inside it the god Aššur, the great lord, (and) the gods and goddesses living in Assyria, and (then) I made splendid offerings and presented my gift(s). I made fine oil from olives and aromatics. At the inauguration of the palace, I had the heads of the subjects of my land drenched (and) I watered their insides with sweet wine.
... I have received
The god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises. He made all of the black-headed (people) from the Upper Sea of the Setting Sun to the Lower Sea of the Rising Sun bow down at my feet. Thus did recalcitrant rulers come to fear battle with me. While they were abandoning their settlements, (ii 15') they flew away alone like bats (living) in crevices to inaccessible place(
... of Elam ...
May Šamaš, the great judge of heaven and earth, impose a heavy punishment on you.
Disregard the (formulation) of the prayer for today's case, be it good or faulty...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-belu-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! The city of Der and the fort are well.
he ...
total ... ;
The magnates who went ... have returned and entered (the Palace).
... he sent a messenger to Nabû-ušabši, the sheikh of the land of the Qedar, saying: "Let us conclude a treaty between us, so we shall enter into it together."
... ed
The king, my lord, knows that the city of Der is a fortress of the land of the Philistines. The king, my lord, should send me the king's men to garrison it.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Witness Nabû-abu-uṣur, ...
Witness Silim-ili.
the town of Harbina ...
... , ... , ... , ... ,
NN, servant of the women
... of the town of Di'nanu
... the elders ...
... words ...
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, wise prince, circumspect ruler, shepherd of the people of Assyria, (and) leader of a widespread population, I: I had a palace built anew in the city Tarbiṣu as the residence of Ashurbanipal, the senior son of the king, my lord, and I laid out a garden (and) planted all kinds of aromatic plants (and) fruit trees in it.
... he/they will not ... and he/they will not ... but will go away.
(As for) the one who alters my inscribed object (and) disrespects my words, who does evil against me (and) my offspring, may the goddess Ištar, mistress of war and battle, smash his weapons, may she bring about the defeat of his land, may he not stand firm before his enemy, may the god Sîn, lord of the lunar disk, shorten his life, may the god Šamaš, judge of heaven and underworld, remove his eyesight, may the goddess Ištar, mistress of war and battle, smash
The moon will complete the day in Adar (XII).
When the god Marduk, the great lord, elevated me (and) gave me the land and people to rule, I myself was constantly present (and) incessant towards Marduk. I provided for Esagil and Ezida, kept shrines in good order, (and) constantly sought original rites.
If a planet ... in the constellation ... : the governors will exercise complete dominion.
240 sheep;
20, the 'residences' of the ... ;
... "He is not a criminal; he is a citizen of Babylon.
Witness ... -abi.
1 seah 1 'litre' of regular offering loaves;
And the king, my lord, should not be afraid of it. The king, my lord, should not be worried about it.
I have heard that the men of the Palace have said to the men of the Inner City: "You are our servants." They have not said a word to the men of the Inner City, but have said it to us.
4 minas ...
... the chief victualler ... the Itu'eans ...
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant who is loyal to his lord.
To the goddess Ištar, his lady: Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, presented (this object) for the sake of his life.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have seen fear and terror at night, or jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
a ditto of small onions;
... his ... s
and he will make the chief eunuch and the chief ... go out.
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord!
The 29th day, which they call the Silence: they cast Qingu and his forty sons from the roof.
... , ... ,
5 — Hanṭasanu,
I, Aššur-etel-ilani, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Šamšī-Adad (IV), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Shalmaneser (III), (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil and vice-regent of the god Aššur: I, the merciless weapon which lays low lands hostile to him, I, the king who sub
... I have ... ed ... to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, ...
If on the 14th day the moon and sun are seen together: reliable speech; the land will become happy; the gods will remember Akkad favorably.
shall place 10 minas of refined silver and one mina of pure gold in the lap of Belanu residing in Hirana, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
... you did to me
silver, gold, ...
in the presence of ...
... the words of ...
Witness Ahu-immê, witness Ki-šalmaneser,
I have received the ... of the city of ... , and am herewith sending them to the king, my lord. The ... of the city of ... are with me.
(As for) the one who alters my inscribed object (and) disrespects my words, may the god Šamaš, the exalted lord, glare at him angrily and determine a bad fate for him!
In the month of Nisan (I), on the 29th day, the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send me the news of the Urarṭian?" — I have now written to the king, my lord.
1 goose, 1 duck, 10 turtledoves.
To the king, my lord: your servant Akkullanu. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
From Nabû-šuma-iškun.
Palace of Sargon (II),
I have sent ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your great divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
I captured the cities of the land Bīt-Ḫamban, which are on the border of the land Elam.
Palace of Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, king of the kings of (Lower) Egypt, Upper Egypt, (and) Kush, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, wise prince, shepherd of the people of Assyria, (and) leader of a widespread population, I:
The chariot-driver of the bodyguard of the ša šēpi guard, who ... to the son of Bel-Harran-belu-uṣur, has contracted and bought him from these gentlemen for x minas of silver.
Witness Bel-...
I will do the work.
When you are to strew salt on the bread, you say: “Aššur, bless Mullissu! Mullissu, may Aššur bless you! May Mullissu, the great mother, who gives birth to you, make you attain old age, prolong your days, and keep you alive! May she make the foundation of your throne secure for future days! May she make you attain your wish! May she make you attain happiness and physical well-being! May she make you attain old age, prolong your days, and keep you alive! May she make your offspring secure
The god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises. He made all of the black-headed (people) from the Upper Sea of the Setting Sun to the Lower Sea of the Rising Sun bow down at my feet. Thus did recalcitrant rulers come to fear battle with me. While they were abandoning their settlements, (ii 5') they flew away alone like bats (living) in crevices to inaccessible place(s
(As for) the one who alters my inscribed object (and) disrespects my words, who does evil against me (and) my offspring, may (the god) Aššur, the great lord, glare at him angrily and determine a bad fate for him! May he make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the lands and have no pity on him! May he (the god Aššur) make his name (and) his seed disappear from the land of Sumer and Akkad! May he have no pity on him forever!
From Nabû'a of Assur.
... Nergal ... son of Ili-pada
Witness ... -ili, eunuch.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did you not remind me?" I reminded the Palace Superintendent, but they did not remind me.
Nabû-eriba, ... ; 2 women; 3 sons; in all 3.
Nabû-naṣir, governor of Barhalzi;
total, the men from ...
Concerning the offerings about which my lord wrote to me, I have made them. The king, my lord, can be glad.
There are 2 fissures on the left of the 'finger.'
... of ...
Witness Zeru-ukin, scribe.
Witness Ahu-lešir, chief eunuch.
the son of ...
The king, my lord, should ask the chief victualler whether there is any wine in the storehouse that is not (written) on this tablet.
Su'alâ,
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
The chariot-driver of the king, my lord, is a servant of the governor of Arrapha. He has a chariot of his own and is a competent driver. He has been appointed to the service of the governor of Arrapha. The governor of Arrapha has appointed him to the service of the chief victualler. He has been appointed to the service of the chief victualler. He has a chariot of his own and is a competent driver. The chief victualler has appointed him to the service of the chief victualler.
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, wise prince, circumspect ruler, shepherd of the people of Assyria, (and) leader of a widespread population, I:
12, of the 'cavity' of the 'well-being.'
The king, my lord, should know it.
Aššur-belu-uṣur has contracted and bought him for 100 sheep.
Ever since the king, our lord, sat on the throne, we have been keeping watch on the city of Akkad. Now, in the month of Nisan (I), we have seen the king's messenger, and we are keeping watch on the city of Akkad.
... my messenger
As to the watch about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... the moon will complete the day" —
I have sent ... to the king, my lord; ... the gods of ...
This from before Aššur.
Now, if it is agreeable to the king, my lord, let them send me a sealed order concerning the matter.
The festival has been celebrated; the gods have returned in peace. May Bel and Belet, Nabû and Tašmetu, Ištar of Nineveh and Ištar of Arbela, the gods of the house of Anu and the house of Adad, the great gods, my lords, let the king, my lord, see them prosper!
adjoining the house of Zababa-ereš, adjoining the house of Iddin-ereš,
The 7,000 sheep which were in the charge of Bar-uri —
Monument of Aššur-rēša-iši, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Mutakkil-Nusku (who was) also king of the universe (and) king of Assyria.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say:
I am (now) sending to you 25,000 bricks, 100 2-seah jars of beer, 100 2-seah jars of hinhinu-seeds, 100 2-seah jars of budê-confection, 100 2-seah jars of amūmu-beer, 100 2-seah jars of pomegranate beer, 100 2-seah jars of beer of bruised grain.
10 shoots (of sesame);
The chariots which they dispatch from the steppe, and which enter the city, is Bel, who slew Anu.
From Ašaredu.
I, the one who fears the gods, am (now) sending to the king, my lord, the letter which I received from the hands of the messenger of the king, my lord. May the gods of the king, my lord, do as they deem best. May the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
... or a ... , or a ... , or a ... , or a ... , or a ... , or a ... , or a ... , or a ... , or a ... , or a ... , or a ... , or a ... , or a ... ,
14 Kushite horses ... ,
Whoever in the future, at any time,
Will they kill what there is to kill, seize what there is to seize, plunder what there is to plunder, loot what there is to loot?
May they (= all the gods) make you like a chisel in the hands of your enemy.
Ubru-... , ... ; Ahu-... , his son, ... ;
Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, who now is intent on sending Ša-Nabû-šû, chief eunuch, with men, horses, and an army, as great as he wishes, to the city Ashdod in the district of the city Sidon, and placed him in the treaty, and who has concluded a treaty with him, and who has taken an oath by the great gods, and who has imposed upon him the tribute of his lordship, and who has received from him his oath, and who has made him swear an oath by the
The village manager of the chief treasurer gives the regular offerings.
Witness Nabû-ahhe-šallim.
The king's subjects who ...
Now then, the chief eunuch has written to me: "The king, my lord, has said: '... you ... "
Son of Sargon (II), appointee of the god Enlil, nešakku-priest of the god Aššur, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, favorite of the great gods, pious prince, who reveres the gods Nabû and Marduk — the gods, his lords, who have encouraged him through auspicious omens, dream(s), (and) message(s) from ecstatics — am I:
the forts ...
... and the troops of the city of Tyre
Witness Didî.
2 (of) Iqqur īpuš,
The 26th day: favorable.
I captured the city Uarbis, which belonged to the land Uqutti, and added (it) to the province of the chief treasurer.
... of the son of Yakin ...
the governor of Hatarakka ...
He performs a sheep offering, pours out a libation bowl of water, and provides cooked meat.
1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... ,
Witness Puṭu-ši.
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, wise prince, circumspect ruler, shepherd of the people of Assyria, (and) leader of a widespread population, I: I had a palace built anew in the city Tarbiṣu as the residence of Ashurbanipal, the senior son of the king, my lord, and I laid out a garden (and) planted all kinds of aromatic plants (and) fruit trees in it.
... in the palace of the queen mother, in the bedroom of the lady of the palace, in the bedroom of the son of the palace,
I, Sîn-šarra-iškun, governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, son of Ningal-iddin, governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, son of Nudimmud, (who was also) governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari:
1, Zizâ;
Witness Mušezib-Aššur, ...
... they have brought in
... as I
Witness Se'-ila'i, ditto.
Palace of Sargon (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods:
News of the son of Yakin: he is in Babylon.
... I will ...
The king, our lord, knows that we are loyal to our lord. We have been treated like this ever since we were small children. Now, we have grown up, and our lord has treated us even more generously.
... one son of Yakin and one son of Zababa
At that time, the wall of my city Aššur, which Aššur-nādin-aḫḫē, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-dān (II), vice-regent of the god Aššur, my forefather, had previously built — that wall had become old and (v 10) dilapidated. I cleared away its debris down to the foundation pit. I rebuilt (it) from top to bottom. I deposited my monumental inscriptions. I deposited my clay
... I have sent to my lord
... the commander-in-chief ...
The king, our lord, knows that we are servants of the crown prince. We have no oxen, no rams, no hectares of arable land, no seed corn, no grain, no barley, no sesame, no oil, no honey, no wine, no beer, no wine, no oil, no honey, no beer, no wine.
... to the Babylonians, the Chaldeans, the Arameans, the Cimmerians, the Elamites, the Gutians, the Manneans, the Medes, the ... ,
... before ...
... their ... and their oxen
You shall not change nor alter the word of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, but serve this very Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, whom Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, has presented to you, and he shall exercise the kingship and lordship over you. You shall not revolt against him, nor make rebellion or insurrection against him, nor do anything to him which is not good, but serve him in truth and justice. You shall not seize him and put him to death, nor hand him over to his enemy
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me:
... Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, who is now intent on sending him to Egypt,
2 gold earrings, 2 gold bracelets, 2 gold ... , 1 gold ... ,
... I ... to ...
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments...
Witness Apladad-eṭir.
1, 1, the 'residences' of the 'farmer,' the 'residences' of the ... , the 'residences' of the ... ;
Month Adar (XII), 12th day.
... the son of Yakin ...
... let me come ...
5 seahs of ... -loaves; a basket of (mixed) fruit.
... I have not heard any news of him since he went to the Palace. Now, as soon as he has returned, I shall send him to the Palace with my messenger.
in the town of Ilu-na'id ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šarru-emuranni. Good health to the king, my lord!
From Nergal-eṭir.
... against the king, my lord
4 ... -garments, red, of the port;
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Ashur-dan (III),
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Bessunu or his sons or his grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Šumma-ilani, his sons and his grandsons,
Month Iyyar (II), 28th day, eponym year of Aššur-naṣir.
3 ... -garments, the front red, of the port, ... ;
Witness Inurtî.
10 turtledoves, served hot;
... the rest
I have heard that ... ; they are ... , and the men of the house of the ... s are ...
... from the town ...
... the xth day;
The king's word to the commander-in-chief: I am well; you can be glad.
Concerning the people about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send them to me?" — I sent them to the king, my lord, as soon as I heard (of it). Now, if it pleases the king, my lord, let them send them to me again, and let me send them to the king, my lord, as soon as they have returned.
Concerning the news of the Urarṭian, he is in the city of Urarṭus. His messenger has come to me, saying: "The king of Urarṭu is in the city of Urarṭus."
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the ... th day of this month, the month ... of this year,
Sîn-šarra-iškun, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Šamaš-rēša-uṣur, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also vice-regent of the god Aššur:
This is its interpretation.
... I have ...
If the earth quakes ... : the land will ...
the ...
NN, royal bodyguard of the crown prince;
... as the son of ...
of field ...
The king, my lord, knows that the ... in the city is ...
Witness Nabû-balassu-iqbi, eunuch of the chief judge.
(As for) the one who removes my inscription and my name, may the god Aššur, my lord, overthrow his sovereignty (and) destroy his name (and) his seed from the land.
Witness Dadî, merchant of ...
Total, of Remanni-Nabû-uṣur.
The heart of the ram is normal...
... not yet ...
... or the ...
I am Šamaš-šumu-ukin, the one who reveres the gods of heaven and the gods of Assyria, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of the great gods, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of Assyria, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of Babylon, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of the land of Sumer and Akkad, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of the land of the Lullumu, the one who is assiduous towards
Month of Shebat (XI), 8th day, eponym year of Bel-Harran-šadû'a (650).
To the king, my lord: your servant PN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Bel and Belet bless the king, my lord!
an estate of ... adjoining the field of Ki-lamši;
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the ... th day of this month, Iyyar (II), to the 22nd day of the month Sivan (III) of this year, 2015, ... days and nights, my stipulated term,
Aššur-šarru-...
I sent ... , saying: "Why did you not send me the ... of the son of Yakin? I will punish you."
NN, farmer, and his people.
Marduk-šumu-uṣur, Naṣiru, Tabnî, ...
Son of Aššur-rēša-iši (I), strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Mutakkil-Nusku (who was) also strong king, king of the universe, and king of Assyria; ...
the king's eunuchs ...
Ubru-Allaya,
... to the presence
The eclipse which took place on the 14th day of the month Iyyar (II) and affected the whole of the land of Akkad —
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), offspring of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, ...
... Zeru-iddina, the merchant of the son of Zababa ...
I shall send ...
Concerning the news of the son of Yakin, the messenger of the king, my lord, whom I sent to the city of Zabban, he told me that the son of Yakin is in Babylon.
As to the news of the king, my lord, the king, my lord, is in the mountain.
If the moon becomes visible in Tebet (X) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
... from Urad-...
Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord?
At that time, I marched to the land Bīt-Ḫamban, which is in the midst of the sea. I conquered the city Bīt-Ḫamban, together with the cities in its environs. I captured Šaparda, a fortress of the land Bīt-Ḫamban. I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, and brought (them) to my city, Aššur
... not yet ...
... beer
2 talents, the audience-gift(s);
shall place 4 minas of silver and one mina of gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners.
If there is fog in the land: business will diminish.
Seal of Šamaš-... ,
Concerning the bile which he purged, it is said as follows: "If a man purges bile, it is good for him."
a writing-board ...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Nabû-rehtu-uṣur or his son or his nephew, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Šamaš-šumu-ukin,
Marduk-... ,
Witness Tab-šar-Sin.
Concerning the substitute king about whom you wrote to me, he is a servant of the crown prince. He is not a substitute king but a substitute king's son. He is a servant of the crown prince, my lord, and he is useful to the crown prince, my lord. He is a substitute king's son, he is not a substitute king but a substitute king's son.
I have heard that the chief eunuch has said to the ... s: "Why do you not obey me? I will ... you."
I shall go and see the work.
As to ... about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me:
On my second campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me so that I mustered my numerous troops and ordered the march to the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians, who since time immemorial had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors. In the mountains, difficult terrain, I rode on horseback. In very rugged terrain I roamed about on foot like a wild bull.
The king should ask them.
I have sent my messenger to the king, my lord, but I have not seen a reply. I have now sent my messenger to the Palace Superintendent, but I have not seen a reply. I have now sent my messenger to the Palace Superintendent again, but I have not seen a reply. I have now sent my messenger to the Palace Superintendent for the third time, but I have not seen a reply.
which in my presence ...
The king, my lord, should ask the chief judge whether I am not a servant of the king, my lord.
Witness Barruqu, ditto.
and ...
... he is ...
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good or faulty...
... they will kill
... the delegate of the Lady of Arbela
an estate of 40 hectares of field,
The 17th day: their leftovers.
8 females, weaned;
Now ...
... of the king, I have heard that he is in Urarṭu.
1 female donkey in exchange for ...
8 (cuts of) meat ... ;
Witness Sukkaya.
... the king, my lord ...
Witness Aššur-šumu-uṣur.
... the land of the Qumānu, the land of the Uqumanu, the land of the Riḫiḫu, the land of the Yadaqqu, the land of the Ubulu, the land of the Damunu, the land of the Gambulu, the land of the Ḫindaru, the land of the Ruʾuʾa, the land of the Ḫamrānu, the land of the Ḫašmar, the land of the Nabatu, the land of the Liʾtaʾu, the
to ...
If the moon at its appearance is very large: the king will reach the highest rank; the land will expand; the king will become strong and have no rival.
... of the house of NN
Pazî, son of Ubru-... ,
the town of Akkad, my lord, ...
... all ...
An estate of Bar-ṣaruri, chariot driver, in the town of Sa'rarina, in the province of the chief cupbearer.
The watch which they keep in the temple of Aššur is for the safety of the land.
And (as for) the one who erases my inscribed name or destroys my royal statue, or changes its position, or does anything to it, or does not place (it) with his (own) statue, or does not anoint (it) with oil, or does not make an offering, or does not return (it) to its place, or does not write my name with his (own) name, or does not return (it) to its place: May the god Enlil, the great lord, extinguish his sovereignty, overthrow his reign, (and)
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "... "
From Balasî.
Tablet of Bel-iqiša to the king, his lord. Good health to the king, my lord! The city of Der and the fort are well. The king, my lord, can be glad.
The palace herald receives all this income of the crown prince.
... a ditto of beer of bruised grain.
... the king, my lord, ... I sent ... to the king, my lord, saying: "The king, my lord, should ask the chief ... ; he knows that the ... of the king, my lord, are ... " The chief ... said: "The king, my lord, should ask the ... s of the Palace." They said: "The king, my lord, should ask the ... of the Palace."
... the gods of the house of Aššur, the great mountain, the lord of lords, the god Marduk, the great lord, my lord,
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, wise prince, circumspect ruler, shepherd of the people, (and) leader of a widespread population, I:
we shall see ...
The king, my lord, should send a letter to the prefect of Que, telling him to send me a detailed report on the work he has done and the work he is doing.
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhe.
... the son of the chief ...
Adad-nārārī, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-dān (II), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Tiglath-pileser (II) (who was) also vice-regent of the god Aššur:
I have heard that you have said to the son of Yakin: "You are a servant of the king; you are not free but must do your work." I have heard that you have said to the son of Yakin: "I am a servant of the king; I am not free but must do my work." I have heard that you have said to the son of Yakin: "I am a servant of the king; I am not free but must do my work." I have heard that you have said to the son of Yakin: "I am a servant of the king; I am
... he has seized ...
Witness Dadî, priest of Ninurta.
Palace of Sargon (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, favorite of the great gods, wise prince, shepherd of the people of Assyria and the land of Sumer and Akkad, I:
... and ...
... the king, my lord, will kill me. If ...
... from the beginning
to 15 minas for 2 ... ;
I have sent my messenger to the king, my lord, but I have not seen a reply. I have now sent my messenger to the crown prince, my lord. May the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
Nergal-uballiṭ ... , son of Zabinu.
I have been keeping the watch of the lord of kings, my lord, and have not sinned against the lord of kings, my lord. I have not seen any hostility of the enemy of the lord of kings, my lord, nor have I heard of it. I have been living in peace and doing my work. Now, the king, my lord, has sent me a letter, saying: "You are to come and see the king, my lord."
An estate of x hectares of land adjoining the field of ... , adjoining the field of ... , adjoining the field of ... , adjoining the field of ... , adjoining the field of ... , adjoining the field of ... , adjoining the field of ... , adjoining the field of ... , adjoining the field of ... , adjoining the field of ... , adjoining the field of ... , adjoining the field of ... , adjoining the field of ... , adjoining the field of ... , adjoining the field of ...
... in the charge of Aššur-aplu-...
If the moon at its appearance ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... your ... , your ... ,
Witness Zar-Issar.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the ... th day of this month, the month ... of this year, to the ... th day of the month ... of this year,
To the king, my lord: your servant Inurta-belu-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord!
... I have sent ... to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should ask him ...
Witness Silim-Aššur, grand vizier.
to you ...
... I have seized ...
Month Iyyar (II), 6th day, eponym year of NN.
... the house of Apladad-naṣir
Witness Nabû-eṭir, chief victualler.
1 sisalhu ox, of the chief treasurer;
18, total 20 — ... ;
Witness Nergal-šumu-uṣur, scribe.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nadin-šumi. Good health  (and) good health again to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk  bless the king, my lord!
The palace of Adad-nārārī, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dān (II), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tiglath-pileser (II) (who was) also king of the universe (and) king of Assyria.
2 black horses,
The bread of the road is good, the water of the road is good, the houses of the magnates are good, the ... of the magnates is good.
He said: "I will not give them anything."
... "I am a citizen of Assyria.
Seal of Se'-eriba, owner of the woman being sold.
The palace of Aššur-rēša-iši, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Mutakkil-Nusku (who was) also strong king, king of the universe (and) king of Assyria: (brick) belonging to the forecourt of the House of the Labūnu.
When I heard that you had captured the city Qarqar, I sent a eunuch of mine, the chief eunuch, to the city Qarqar. He brought me the people of the city Qarqar and the people of the city Ḫarḫar, together with their possessions.
Month Iyyar (II), 12th day, eponym year of Nabû-šar-ahhešu, governor of Sam'al.
... 1/2 mina ...
... to the city ... in the province of Barhalzi, in the district of the chief cupbearer,
6 urnutu-garments ... ;
From Adad-šumu-uṣur.
... the governor ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ra'im-ketti. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
He shall pay in full in the month of Nisan (I). If he does not pay, it shall increase by a fourth.
... I have not heard anything specific about it ...
Nergal-iddin, servant of Nabû-nadin-ahhe, and his people;
2 ... ;
The priest of Aššur, the priest of Mullissu, the priest of the House of God, the chief chanter, the chief singer, the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... ,
... the Elamite
4 seahs of bread, 1 seah per day, for the exorcist.
x houses, 200 doors,
The 21st day: favorable.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your great divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
700, 700, the town of Sarugi;
81 12 11 10 8 7 6 5 — the palace of ...
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
... s of the town of Til-Barsip
130 hectares of arable land, 10 hectares under cultivation therein; 1 house; 1 threshing-floor; 1 orchard; 1 well; 1 ... ;
The king, our lord, knows that we are servants of the house of the governor. The governor has ... ed the house of our lords.
Month Adar (XII), 25th day, eponym year of Mannu-ki-Adad.
he will speak ...
... -ušezibanni, his son, Giri-... ,
... the god Marduk, the great lord, ... I built (and) completed (it) from its foundations to its parapets. I deposited my monumental inscriptions. I inscribed my name upon them and I deposited (them) with my monumental inscriptions. I made (the god) Aššur, the great lord, enter into it (the palace) and made (him) reside on (his) eternal dais. I offered sumptuous offerings before him and presented (him) with my gifts. I made the goddess Zarpanītu,
... in the month of ... , the ... th day, ...
I have now written to you: if you do not wish to be implicated in this matter, do not argue with him but come and see me. I will speak kindly with him and encourage him, and I will not let him go out of my presence until I have heard his whole story.
From Ašaredu.
The god Marduk, the great lord, the Enlil of the gods, the one who directs all of the gods (and) holds the link between the Igīgū- and Anunnakū-gods, the one who decrees fates, the one who makes firm the foundations of the royal throne, the one who dwells in Ezida — the true house, the house of his lordly majesty — the one who has gathered to himself all of the divine offices of highest rank, the one who is pre-eminent in the four quarters (of the world), the one
Ashur-la-kenu-ubasha,
After I had finished the work on my palace, I invited inside it the god Aššur, the great lord, (and) the gods and goddesses living in Assyria, and (then) I made splendid offerings and presented my gift(s). I made fine oil from olives and aromatics. At the inauguration of the palace, I had the heads of the subjects of my land drenched (and) I watered their insides with sweet wine.
Nabû-zeru-... , his brother, his mother, ...
Witness Šulmu-ahhe, royal bodyguard.
3 talents of copper, capital, belonging to Bar-hatê, at the disposal of Nadinu.
Total 11 ...
Witness Nanî.
The king, my lord, should know this.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ululayu. Good health to the king, my lord! The king's land and district are well. The mood of the people is good. The king, my lord, can be glad indeed.
... in ...
... of the son of Zababa
I shall send ...
saying, "...
... I ... to the city Aššur. The ... of the city Aššur ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ...
5 mares:
"... I am ... ; I am a servant who is loyal to his lord. I am a ... who is ... ; I am a ... who is ... ; I am a ... who is ... ; I am a ... who is ... ; I am a ... who is ... ; I am a ... who is ... ;
... the god Nabû,
The 19th day: favorable.
The king, my lord, knows that we are (now) on our way to the Palace.
Witness ... -naṣir.
the town of Hindanu ...
You offer fatty tissue and roast meat before Sîn, make a flour/incense offering, pour beer and wine, and sing: “O Anunnaki, lead me, Great Lords, let us build your holy city.”
Witness Nabû-šumu-... , scribe, keeper of the contract.
... or a ...
(... ) of ...
... Ezida ...
... from the ... of ...
... Aššur-šallimanni
And concerning the cavalrymen about whom you wrote to me, I have sent them to you. They should come and stay with you, and you should give them orders concerning the king's work. They should also keep watch over them, and you should inform me about their health and their work.
the gods ...
Total 15, the household of the chief treasurer.
If the moon is surrounded by a halo, and the Pleiades stand in it: in this year women will give birth to male children.
Ammon
Seal of Sasî, owner of the man being sold.
... the Itu'eans ...
... I have ... ed on him ... , saying: "You are a servant of the king; you are not allowed to ... against the king's servants. You ... against the king's servants."
the Mušku ...
From Munnabitu.
The silver shall increase by a fourth.
all ...
in the future ...
Witness Ubru-Nabû, son of Zabbanu.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the 1st day of this month, Iyyar (II), to the 2nd day of the month Sivan (III) of this year, 2016, ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-belu-ka''in. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I created clay mold(s) of tree trunks and date palm(s), (of) twelve raging lions, as well as (of) twelve magnificent bull colossi with perfect features (and) twenty-two sphinxes that are coated in allure and charm, and I poured copper into it.
Witness Ṭuri-Aya.
The king's subjects ... in the city of Zabban, the king's subjects ... in the city of Zabban ...
... the house of the Lady of Reš
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Zazaya.
Witness NN, servant of Bel-šulmu.
Now ...
If the moon at its appearance wears a crown: the harvest of the land will prosper; the king will reach the highest rank.
55 sheep, 55 bowls (of wine), 55 jars (of wine): consumption.
(Property) of Šamaš-rēša-uṣur, chief eunuch.
Palace of Sennacherib, king of Assyria: (This is) the audience gift that Karib-il, king of Saba, presented to me. Whoever erases my inscribed name (or) places (it) in the service of a god (or another) person, may the deities ... , ... , (and) ... make his name (and) his seed disappear.
... in Der
When I was in ... , they said to me: "The ... s have been sold for money." I went and informed the king, my lord.
an estate of 1 hectare of land adjoining the road of the house of Il-ereš;
29 (items): copper basins, copper cauldrons, copper washbasins, copper asallu-bowls, copper diqāru-pots, (and) copper diqāru-pots of cauldrons;
in all, 6: the 'residences' of ...
... a man from Diquqina
At the beginning of my kingship, in my first year, when I sat in greatness on (my) royal throne, good signs were established for me; in heaven and on earth, he (the god Marduk) constantly sent me his omen(s). The angry gods were reconciled (and) they repeatedly disclosed favorable signs concerning the (re)entering of Esagil and the renovation of Babylon. (v 10) In the sky, the god Sîn, the lord of the gods, constantly disclosed favorable signs concerning the (re)entering of Es
to Ilu-...
To the king, my lord: your servant Urad-Nanaya. Good health to the king, my lord! May Ninurta and Gula give happiness and physical well-being to the king, my lord!
... he will seize and give to him
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-bani. Good health to the king, my lord!
4 minas of silver, 3 togas, 3 tunics, tribute: the Palace Superintendent;
saying, "...
... here ...
10 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... ,
... of the palace
Month Elul (VI), 20th day, eponym year of Mannu-ki-Adad.
He pours out a libation bowl before the vizier, ...
... I have not yet heard ... ; they are still ... , and I have not yet received the ... of the ... of the king, my lord. I have ... ed the ... of the ... of the king, my lord, and deposited them in the ... of the ... of the king, my lord.
... the town of A... , son of A...
The ...
and they will not give them back ...
Concerning the news of the son of Yakin: he is in Babylon. The king, my lord, should send a letter to Bel-iqiša, saying: "Let him come and stay with you until I have more time."
... we shall do
... 20 hectares ...
... Assyria
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
On my second campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me so that I mustered my numerous troops and ordered the march to the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians, who since time immemorial had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors. In the high mountains, difficult terrain, I rode on horseback. In very rugged terrain I roamed about on foot like a wild bull.
Witness Nabû-šezib, deputy of the governor.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your great divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
... upon ...
Witness Aššur-...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity will be saved.
(As for) the one who removes my inscription and my name: May the god Aššur, my lord, overthrow his sovereignty (and) destroy his name (and) his seed from the land.
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial audience gift from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
... the rest ...
... I have not seen a single one of his magnates, nor have I heard any report about them. I have sent ... to the magnates of the king, my lord, saying: "Let them send me the ... horses of the king, my lord, so that I can give them to the ... horses of the king, my lord."
Concerning the news of the son of Yakin: he is in Babylon. He has not set out for the king my lord's presence, but has ... ed the Babylonians.
4 litres of honey ...
Witness Silim-Aššur, horse trainer.
... years
The messenger of the king, my lord, came to me on the 23rd of Nisan (I). I have sent the men of the king, my lord, to the Palace on the 24th.
From Rašil the older, servant of the king.
Total, the offerings of the chief judge.
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... I ... to the lord of lords ...
190 ... ,
“The god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises. He made all of the black-headed (people) from the Upper Sea of the Setting Sun to the Lower Sea of the Rising Sun bow down at my feet. Thus did recalcitrant rulers come to fear battle with me. While they were abandoning their settlements, (ii 15) they flew away alone like bats (living) in crevices to inaccessible place
When the king, my lord, heard this news, he sent a letter to me, saying: "Why did you not send me the news of the Urarṭian?"
Month Adar (XII), 7th day, eponym year of Abi-ram, chief vizier.
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur.
as I have done ...
A tablet of Bel-le'i to the palace scribe, his lord.
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
We shall send the king, my lord, a letter concerning the work of the crown prince.
Concerning the news of the king about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send them?" — I sent them as soon as I heard (of it). Now, if it pleases the king, my lord, let them send them again.
... my ... , my ... !
Tribute from the land of the people of Unqu.
I have not heard ...
Shalmaneser, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur:
To the king, my lord: your servant, Dadî. Good health to the king, my lord. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord. May the great gods bestow long days, well-being and joy upon the king, my lord.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, have seen fear and terror at night, or jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
the woman ... ; the woman ... ; the woman ... ;
... I have sent ... to the king, my lord, saying: "... " Now, if it pleases the king, my lord, let them send me a ... , so I can give it to the ... of the king, my lord.
Seal of Zabinu, seal of Kiṣir-Aššur, seal of Kiṣir-Issar,
... the work ...
... their ... to their ...
... the king ...
The messengers of the king, my lord, who went to me, saying: "Let the people of your land come and enter the fortress," — they have entered the fortress.
... he will ...
Disregard that ... he may think it over, turn back, and leave it...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send an answer to my letter?"
Your servant Nabû-bel-šumati: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: I have sent my messenger to the king, my lord, but he has not yet returned.
Šamaš-šumu-ukin, king of Assyria, son of Ashur-dan (III), (who was) also king of Assyria:
... let him do ...
A tablet of Aššur-bēl-nišēšu to the palace scribe, his lord. Good health to my lord!
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord!
x hectares of field in the town of Hanunu, a village in its entirety, 1 house, 1 threshing floor, 1 orchard, in the town of Hanunu —
Will they achieve victory and power? Will the chief eunuch and the army at his disposal return safely and set foot on Assyrian soil?
... the king, my lord, ...
Witness Balṭu, scribe.
... the army of the chief eunuch
of ...
... I have not heard ...
scribe of the chief treasurer, ...
Month ... , 1st day, eponym year of Šulmu-beli-lašme.
(As for) Uaiteʾ (Iautaʾ), hardship befell him and he fled alone. The deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela, the gods who support me, rendered a just verdict for me concerning Uaiteʾ. (v 15) In order to prevent (Uaiteʾ) from doing harm to (other) people, I imposed a heavy punishment on him. I confined him in
When the god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises, (i 5') he made all of the black-headed (people) from the Upper Sea of the Setting Sun to the Lower Sea of the Rising Sun bow down at my feet; they (now) pull my yoke. While they were abandoning their settlements, (i 10') they flew away alone like bats (living) in crevices to inaccessible place(
in the temple of the goddess Ištar ...
... this ...
they will say ...
If the king, my lord, commands, let them send me the names of the people who have been given out, so I can write to the king, my lord.
O Marduk, great lord, when you look upon this table with pleasure, (and) when (this) table is set, may the gods of heaven and netherworld, the great gods, my lords, look upon this table with pleasure and may a good word for me be set upon their lips! May they determine as my fate a long life, fullness of old age, good health, and happiness!
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Aššur-šallim-ahhe or his son or his nephew, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Šumma-ilani, his sons and his grandsons, shall pay one talent of tin to the god Aššur, his lord, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Your servant, the sheikh of the land of Akkad: I would gladly die for the vizier, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless my lord! Say to my lord:
As to the ...
... he will ...
Concerning the news of the son of Yakin ...
At that time, I made the enemy people whom I had captured carry baskets (of earth) and they made bricks. I mixed (the mud for) the foundations of the terrace with ... (and) I raised (it) as high as a mountain. I built (and) completed (it) from its foundations to its crenellations.
The king, my lord, should ask the ... official ... ; he knows the story.
... to ...
to ...
10 wooden ... ,
... the upper part
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Se'-ahadi or his sons or his grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Bel-Harran-šarru-uṣur and his sons,
Witness Nabû-rehtu-uṣur, ...
Now, Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, has sent me to you. Do not neglect to do your work, but keep watch over your houses and your people.
... I will give
Witness NN, scribe.
Concerning the ... about which my lord wrote to me, the king, my lord, should ask ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Urad-Nanaya. Good health to the king, my lord! May Ninurta and Gula give happiness and physical well-being to the king, my lord!
To the goddess Ištar, his lady: Sargon (II), presented (this object) for the sake of his life.
Total, 41, the town of Zabban.
... s, x+100 ... , x+100 ... ,
I shall send ...
To the governor, my lord: your servant Nabû-zeru-iddina. Good health to my lord! The city of Der and the fort are well.
... I have ...
... Now if it is agreeable to him, let them write to me.
Witness NN, scribe.
I marched to the land of the people of Ḫabḫu, who live in the mountains. I conquered the city Tīl-Bāri which is at the foot of Mount Abirus. I carried off their gods, their property, their possessions, their oxen, their sheep and goats, their people, their women, their sons, their daughters, their property, (and) their goods.
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good or faulty...
Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises.
(As for) Aššur-belu-uṣur, the ... of the land of Akkad, who had not honored the oath of the lord of lords, he suffered from dropsy, (that is) “full water.” He passed away in the midst of his enemies.
... to the ... of the king, my lord
In the future may a later prince, when that wall becomes old and dilapidated, restore it. May he restore my inscribed name and my monumental inscription to its place. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
After I had finished the work on my palace, I invited inside it the god Aššur, the great lord, (and) the gods and goddesses living in Assyria, and (then) I made splendid offerings and presented my gift(s). I made fine oil from olives and aromatics. At the inauguration of the palace, I had the heads of the subjects of my land drenched (and) I watered their insides with sweet wine.
... in the gateway
... the king, my lord
... he should do
Zeru-ukin, Ahu-iddina, and Ubru-Nabû,
... the king, my lord ...
to NN ...
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
Witness ... -iqbi, son of Zababa-na'id.
... the goddess Ištar ... I built (and) completed (it) from its foundations to its crenellations. I ... the goddess Ištar ... I made (it) larger than before. I ... the goddess Ištar ... I ... the goddess Ištar ...
1, the commander-in-chief ... ;
... I am a dead dog. Let me see light under your protection.
Witness Yahuṭu, ditto.
I received tribute from the people of Tyre and Sidon, and from the kings of Byblos, Sidon, Byblos, Arwad, (and) Byblos.
Ashur-ilaya,
cure of ...
1, Mušallim-Marduk;
... in the town of ... in the district of the chief ...
to the son of Yakin
Witness Aššur-le'i, ...
Šamaš-ila'i, ... ; Ša-la-ili-mannu, ... ;
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, wise prince, circumspect ruler, shepherd of the people, (and) leader of a widespread population, I:
... I asked him: "Why did you not send the men?"
Now, the ... s of the king, my lord, have ... ed the ... of the king, my lord.
(As for) Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, (my) hostile brother who had planned murder against Assyria, he (the god Marduk) determined for him a cruel death. He consigned him to a conflagration and burned him alive.
Your servant Qišti-Marduk: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
Month Elul (VI), 3rd day, eponym year of Sin-šarru-uṣur.
Witness NN, ... of the queen.
5 cans of beer;
The gods Šamaš and Adad will listen to the prayers of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, and will grant him success. (As for) the one who removes my inscription and my name, may the god Aššur, my lord, overthrow his sovereignty (and) destroy his name (and) his seed from the land. May the god Adad strike his land with terrible lightning (and) afflict his land with want. May the god Šamaš, my lord, judge him justly (and) determine a bad fate for him.
I have not yet received the ... of the king, my lord. What is it  about?
At that time, the temple of the goddess Ištar, mistress of the city Arbela, my mistress, which Ilu-šumma, my forefather, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Šalim-aḫum, vice-regent of Aššur, had previously built — that temple had become old and I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I rebuilt (it) from top to bottom. I deposited my monumental inscriptions.
... the town of Bazrê, the town of Bazrê, the town of Bazrê, the town of Bazrê, the town of Bazrê, the town of Bazrê, the town of Bazrê, the town of Bazrê, the town of Bazrê, the town of Bazrê, the town of Bazrê, the town of Bazrê, the town of Bazrê, the town of Bazrê, the town of Bazrê, the town of Bazrê
... "If
... 28 horses have come in today.
Witness Remanni-Adad, ditto.
from Dur-Šarruken ...
3 wooden spatulae;
As to Aššur-bani ...
Witness Nergal-šarru-uṣur, 'third man.'
... at the disposal of Ša-lešir.
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods:
2 horses, 5 mules, 1 chariot, 1 team of mules:
in the course of my campaign ... I captured the city ...
Bel-na'id, the prefect, and the ... , the prefect of the Itu'eans, have taken a house in the town of Baruri, and are living there. The prefect of the Itu'eans has appointed a servant of his in the town of Baruri as mayor. The prefect of the Itu'eans has appointed a servant of his in the town of Baruri as mayor.
... they are bringing to the king, my lord, ... the city of Akkad and the king's subjects.
before the gods ...
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord; let the king, my lord, ask him what the king, my lord, commands.
3 ... ;
He shall pay the double sum of 4 minas of silver.
1, prefect of the chief eunuch;
What else? Let them write to me (about it).
The king, my lord, should ask the messenger of the Urarṭian ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "The troops should come with you" — hitherto the captives have not been allowed to leave the city gates.
Witness Pan-Issar-lamur.
... the commander-in-chief ...
The temple of the goddess Ištar, mistress of the city Arbela, which Šamšī-Adad (III), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Tiglath-pileser (III), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (III), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-rabi (II) (who was) also vice-regent of the god Aššur, had previously built
Witness Nabû-eriba, deputy of the team-commander.
You shall not do wrong to Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, nor to his sons, grandsons, brothers, or nephews, nor to any relative of his, nor to any prefect or governor, nor to any mayor or city overseer, nor to any governor or any prefect appointed over you, nor to any royal delegate, nor to any servant or labour-duty superior of yours, nor to any person at all who is in your presence, nor to any person who is not in your presence,
The Lady of Arbela, the Lady of Nineveh, the Lady of Calah, the Lady of Dur-Šarruken, the Lady of Der, the Lady of Uruk, the Lady of Eanna, the Lady of Kurbail, the Lady of Cutha, the Lady of Sippar, the Lady of Nippur, the Lady of Babylon, the Lady of Borsippa,
The priest of Aššur, the priest of Mullissu, the priest of Šerua, the priest of Belet-ili, the priest of the Assyrian Ištar, the priest of the Assyrian Mašmaš, the priest of the Assyrian Ninurta, the priest of the Assyrian Nusku, the priest of the Assyrian Mandanu, the priest of the Assyrian Nergal, the priest of the Assyrian Laṣ, the priest of the Assyrian Išum, the priest of the Assyrian Nergal
From this day, the ... th day of this month, the month ... of this year, to the ... th day of the month ... of this year, for these 30 days and nights, the term stipulated for the performance of (this) extispicy — within this stipulated term,
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, ...
Witness Basnî, servant of ...
which he/she ... to ...
I will not give any ...
... of the great gods of heaven and earth
... gold and silver ...
An estate of 1 decare of field in the town of ...
I have now written to the governor, my lord; let my lord do as he deems best.
... I have not heard a word from you since ... , and I have not seen your ... in the camp. If you are alive, why do you not do the work of your lord?
The 11th day: at court, favorable.
Remut-Aya,
If he does not pay, it shall increase by a fourth. He shall pay double to the son of Yakin.
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Šarru-... , ...
If the sun rises and the sky becomes red-brown: there will be plenty and wealth in the land; the king will become strong and have no rival.
3 2-seah jars of hinhinu-seeds;
his sons ...
... as the son of the king ...
Month Shebat (XI), 1st day, eponym year of Zazaya.
2 (of) the series of the Lady of Nineveh,
... what you did ...
... his seed ...
Should Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, appoint the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity to the position which is written in this papyrus?
Witness Nanû.
I have heard that the king, my lord, has sent a bodyguard to me, saying: "Let him come and see the work that you are doing." So let him come and see it. I have also heard that the king, my lord, has sent a bodyguard to the chief cupbearer, saying: "Let him come and see the work that you are doing." So let him come and see it.
I am now sending him to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should question him.
... I will give.
Month of Iyyar (II), 18th day.
50 horses trained to the yoke, the queen mother, complete;
... to the land of Akkad ... the king, my lord, ... I have now written to the king, my lord. If it pleases the king, my lord, let them send me a sealed order concerning the ... of the king, my lord, and I shall send them to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should know (this).
Ahi-pada,
... ;
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
... adjoining the road that leads to the village of ...
... 1 ...
Now then ...
... I will not let you go out
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the magnates and governors with the men, horses, and army at their disposal, who are going to the district of Media to collect a tribute of horses,
Nabû ... will hear ...
May Marduk, the great lord, the sage of the gods, the one who knows everything, look upon this work with pleasure and may a good word for me be set upon his lips!
total, 4 ...
... at my disposal ...
adjoining the field of the woman Ahatâ,
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. Good health to the king, my lord!
The king, my lord, should not be worried about it. The king, my lord, should not be afraid of it.
... the people of the land of the Qumānu, the land of the Šubaru, the land of the Yasubigallians, the land of the Uqumanu, the land of the Lullumu, the land of the Ḫabḫu, the land of the Tīl-Bāri, the land of the Ḫašmar, the land of the Tīl-Abnāni, the land of the Tīl-Aššuri, the land of the Tīl-ša-Zabdāni
Now ...
9 ditto of garlic;
As to the governors about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why have they not sent their horses?" — they have sent their horses, but they have not yet returned.
1, the grand vizier;
... will say ...
2 homers of barley — Marduk-šarru-uṣur;
To the governor, my lord: your servant, Dadî. May Nabû and Marduk bless my lord. May they grant you happiness and physical well-being.
... I received 10 minas of gold, x minas of silver, 10 minas of bronze, 10 minas of iron, 10 minas of lead, 10 minas of tin, 10 minas of anzahhu, 10 minas of dark-blue wool, 10 minas of blue wool, 10 minas of red wool, 10 minas of purple wool,
35 homers of regular offering loaves;
of 112 ...
1 mina, Nabû-... ,
40, the exorcists;
The men of the house of the chief eunuch, who had fled to me and had grasped my feet, have entered Babylon. They have been received with open arms and have been kept alive. They have ... ed their ... and are doing their work.
To the vizier, my lord: your servant Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health to my lord!
Witness Nur-Sin.
5 sheep, 10 (cuts of) meat, a bowl of wine, 1 seah of beer — in the town of Šabbu.
... of the camp
... you ...
The forts and the land of the king, my lord, are well. The mood of the people is good. The king, my lord, can be glad indeed.
To the king, my lord: your servant Šulmu-beli. Good health to the king, my lord!
1 duck, 10 turtledoves.
or in ...
Witness Zababa-eriba, 'third man'.
in ...
... who ... against the ... of the king, my lord, ...
Aššur ...
... the tablet ...
... the farmer ...
... "I will go
... the troops ...
... in their presence
... the governor
... their ... s
The hand of the lord of kings is very strong; the gods will listen to the king.
... the Lady of the Palace
... the land of Sūḫu
... of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the ...
... the son of Nabû-bel-šumati ... to the son of Daltâ ... the king's servants ...
When the king, my lord, ... , I shall send the ... s to the king, my lord.
... this ...
... to his sons and daughters
1, all oxen,
I have sent ... to the king, my lord; the king, my lord, should ...
As for him (Ḫanūnu), terror and fear fell upon him and he went into a frenzy. He escaped from the city Memphis, the city (and) place upon which he relied and, in order to save his (own) life, he boarded a ship, abandoned his camp, fled alone, and entered the city Thebes. The kings, governors, (and) officials whom Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, had stationed in Egypt came to meet him and kissed his feet. They implored him to give (back) the city (and
Ammon
If a planet comes close to the top of the moon: the king will exercise complete dominion.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
... many ...
... I will give
... the land of Zabban
x talents, the Review Palace;
a cup of ... ;
... to the son of Aššur-...
... I will do ...
10 ewes, belonging to Urdu-Aššur, at the disposal of Nadinu.
... ayu, governor;
If a planet comes close to the top of the moon and stops: the king of the land will exercise world dominion.
10 minas of silver ...
... I have sent ... to the Palace. If he comes, I shall send him to the Palace.
... I have heard that he has said to the chief eunuch: "... "
... the king, my lord ...
Witness Kiṣir-Aššur, horse trainer of the royal bodyguard.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the ... th day of this month, the month ... of this year, to the ... th day of the month ... of this year,
I pursued them on the peaks of the mountains and defeated them. I conquered, plundered, destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire their cities. I captured alive the rest of them and brought (them) to my city Aššur.
... I, Šamaš-rēša-uṣur, ...
which I ...
... in the city of Aššur, in the month of Tishri (VII), on the 10th day, in the eponym year of Aššur-bani, the treasurer.
in the days of ...
... he is not able to raise
I am now writing to you: if it is agreeable to Bel and Marduk, let them appoint me to the service of the chief eunuch, so I can serve the king, my lord, together with my colleagues.
He has made a ... , saying: "... "
From Nabû-iqbi.
... 2 ... s, 1 ... , 1 ... ,
... the head of ...
NN, his daughter, his mother,
Witness Aššur-le'i, 'third man.'
Issar-šarru-... ,
The king, my lord, should ask the crown prince about the house of his father. He has taken the house of his father as a pledge and given it to Aššur-abu-iddina, the chariot fighter.
Ilu-eriba,
... Se'-abu, ...
The 4th day, which they call the Silence: they cast Qingu and his forty sons from the roof.
As to the news of the son of Yakin: he is in Babylon.
... chariot ...
... I shall send
... the king, my lord
... I have seen
... of the king ...
1, Banaya, ... ;
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me:
Sasî, the ...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the 1st day of this month, Iyyar (II), to the 2nd day of the month Sivan (III) of this year, 2015, for 30 days and nights, my stipulated term,
... house ...
At that time, in the reign of a previous king, bad omens occurred in Sumer and Akkad. The people living there were answering each other yes (for) no (and) were telling lies. They led their gods away, neglected their goddesses, abandoned their rites, (and) embraced quite different (rites).
I, the weak (and) powerless one who ... , ... I prayed to the god Šamaš, the exalted lord, the one who ... , and the goddess Aya, the queen, my lady, and they accepted my prayers.
... seah of 8 'litres'
At that time, I marched to the land Bīt-Ḫamban, which is called Pitānu in the language of the people of the land Miḫrānu. By means of the army of the land of the Qumānu, a submissive subject who pulls my yoke, I cut down mighty beams of the land Bīt-Ḫamban (and) brought (them) to my city, Aššur.
Disregard that ...
(As for) the one who alters my inscribed object (and) disrespects my words, may the god Aššur, my lord, overthrow his sovereignty (and) destroy his name (and) his seed from the land.
I ...
The king, our lord, knows that we are servants of the crown prince. We have been appointed in the service of the chief eunuch, and we have kept the watch of the crown prince, our lord, and have not sinned against our lord. Now we have been deprived of our field and our orchard, and we have no means of subsistence.
May they make you like a woman before your enemy.
Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord?
... the king, my lord, ...
the city of Til-Barsip ...
... the city ... I captured ... I carried off ... together with their possessions, ... their oxen, their sheep and goats, ... their ... I razed, destroyed, (and) burned with fire ...
... field, ... ,
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did you not remind me?" I reminded the king, my lord, in the very place where I saw the king, my lord. Now, I have written to the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
... are keeping watch over them
In the middle of the right surface of the 'finger' there is a 'weapon'-mark...
... the son of Daltâ, a shepherd of the land Ellipi
The commander-in-chief, the royal bodyguard, the recruitment officer, the team-commander, the chariot driver, the 'third man,' the chariot fighter, the 'third man' of the team-commander, the 'third man' of the chariot driver, the 'third man' of the recruitment officer, the 'third man' of the team-commander, the 'third man' of the chariot fighter, the 'third man' of the 'third man,' the 'third man' of the 'third man,' the 'third man' of the 'third man
Witness Nabû-šumu-iškun, chariot driver.
... he is in charge of ...
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
715, 29, total 737 — the harem manageresses;
Palace of Sargon (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, wise prince, shepherd of the people of Assyria, (and) leader of a widespread population, I:
Should Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, appoint the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity to the position which is written in this papyrus?
If a planet stands in the east: attack of the enemy.
I have heard that the magnates are saying: "We will not go to the review." If they do not go, the king will surely kill us. So let them go, and let them say in the review what they have to say.
I shall go ...
14 ... ;
Nabû-šar-ahhešu;
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, scribe.
... I have sent my messenger to the son of Bel-iqiša, saying: "Let him send me the ... of the king's household, so I can give it to the king's servants." He has not agreed to send it, but said: "... "
Now, if it is agreeable to the king, my lord, let them appoint me in the service of the chief judge.
He shall pay the silver in its original amount in Iyyar (II). If he does not pay, it shall increase by a fourth.
8 'litres', ... ;
The Ukkaean, the Gambulean, the Cimmerians, the Manneans, the Medes, and the Scythians ...
4 ... ,
And as to what you wrote to me: "... , saying: 'I am going to the city of Aššur-etel-ilani; he will not let me go out of the city gate, and he has arrested me. I have appealed to the king, my lord, saying: 'Let me go out of the city gate'" —
the lands of ...
After I had finished the work on my palace, I invited inside it the god Aššur, the great lord, (and) the gods and goddesses living in Assyria, and (then) I made splendid offerings and presented my gift(s). I made fine oil from olives and aromatics. At the inauguration of the palace, I had the heads of the subjects of my land drenched (and) I watered their insides with sweet wine. (viii 10'') I made fine oil from olives and aromatics. At the inauguration
As to the news of the ... , they have entered Calah and are staying there. The messenger of the son of Yakin has gone with them.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. Good health  to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my  lord!
The king, my lord, knows that ... I have no ... ; I am a servant who is loyal to his lord. I have no ... ; I am a servant who is devoted to his lord. I have no ... ; I am a servant who is assiduous towards his lord. I have no ... ; I am a servant who is attentive to the well-being of his lord. I have no ... ; I am a servant who is assiduous towards the well-being of his lord. I have no ... ; I am a servant who is assiduous towards the well-being of his lord.
1 sisalhu ox,
... of the letter which the king ...
Witness Mannu-ki-Aššur, ...
... these ...
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Nabû-šezib or his sons or his grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Šumma-ilani, his sons and his grandsons,
Witness Nabû-šallimšunu.
you ...
(As for) Umba-LAGABua, the king of the land Elam who had spoken insolent word(s) on account of the cutting off of the head of Teumman — which a low-ranking soldier of my army had cut off — and his brothers, his family, (and) the seed of his father’s house, together with eighty-five nobles of the land Elam who march at his side,
from the town of ...
To the goddess Ištar, mistress of the lands, ... , who dwells in the city Arbela, ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who
The 17th day, which the king goes down to the House of God.
... the moon will complete the day in Nisan (I); on the 14th day it will be seen with the sun.
To the king of the lands, my lord: your servant Bel-ušezib. May Bel, Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
... Marduk-apla-iddina ...
... of ...
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
The messenger of the ... official of the city of Kar-Tukulti-Ninurta has come and said to me: "The king has given me the following order: 'Go and tell the people of Kar-Tukulti-Ninurta that the king is well.'"
scribe.
... will go
The king, my lord, knows that the king, my lord, has been on my side. The king, my lord, has been on my side since the beginning. The king, my lord, has been on my side even when I was a dog. The king, my lord, has been on my side even when I was a puppy. The king, my lord, has been on my side even when I was a baby.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Total, 1, in the town of Izirtu.
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in my mouth...
the troops ...
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
... Ištar ...
Nabû-naṣir, in all 3 ...
Seal of Nabû-šumu-uṣur, son of Aṣabu,
If Venus becomes visible in the month of Araḫsamna (VIII), the king of the Westland will ... attack the king of Assyria.
If in the month of your watch the sun rises and the sky becomes red-brown: there will be plenty and wealth in the land.
... I will give you ...
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
in all 100, of the palace herald ...
May Anu, the great lord, the father of the gods, the one who decrees fates, ordain for you an evil and untoward fate, may he decree for you an evil and untoward fate.
If a snake is seen in a temple: the offerings of that temple will continue for a long time.
200 tubes;
Witness ...
... ni, ... ;
... now ...
... the royal bodyguard ...
If on the 15th day the moon and sun are seen together: a strong enemy will raise his weapons against the king of the land; the king of the land will be shut up in his palace for the length of a month; the step of the enemy will be set towards his land.
Esarhaddon, king of Assyria! I will vanquish your enemies.
An estate of 1 decare of field adjoining ...
... his people
May Sin, the great lord, make his name, his seed, his offspring, and his progeny disappear from the land.
10 hectares, the town ... ;
Sasî, his servant —
... field in the town of Abnana
— Jupiter stands in the constellation Aries.
From Bulluṭu.
(As for) Tammaritu, king of the land Elam,
... saw ...
the woman ...
In my anger, I unleashed a fierce assault on them. I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire their cities. I turned (them) into mounds and ruins. I carried off their booty without number.
... , saying: "Why ... to the son of Aššur-belu-taqqin?"
2, the women from Byblos;
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, have seen fear and terror at night, or jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
The god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises. He made all of the black-headed (people) from the Upper Sea of the Setting Sun to the Lower Sea of the Rising Sun bow down at my feet. Thus did recalcitrant rulers come to fear battle with me. While they were abandoning their settlements, (ii 15') they flew away alone like bats (living) in crevices to inaccessible place(
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also great king, strong king, king of the world, and king of Assyria; valiant man who acts with the support of Aššur, his lord, and has no rival among the princes of the four quarters, marvelous shepherd
... about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let them send me a detailed report on them" — I have now written to the king, my lord, in full earnest. I have sent the king, my lord, a detailed report on them, including their names, their fathers, their mothers, their brothers, their sons, and their daughters.
Town of Arbâ, belonging to Ilu-ibni,
... Eṭiru ...
The man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity ...
The woman Urkittu-šarrat ...
Month of Tammuz (IV), 20th day, eponym year of Aššur-ila'i.
Month ... , 18th day, eponym year of Aššur-bani.
Total 78 men ...
The chariots of the palace herald, the chariots of the chief eunuch, the chariots of the chief treasurer, the chariots of the chief cupbearer, the chariots of the chief confectioner, the chariots of the chief cook, the chariots of the chief judge, the chariots of the chief scribe, the chariots of the chief singer, the chariots of the chief haruspex, the chariots of the chief exorcist, the chariots of the chief physician, the chariots
Witness Sin-zeru-lešir, shepherd of the Itu'eans.
The palace herald, the grand vizier, the chief treasurer, the chief cupbearer, the chief confectioner, the chief baker, the chief brewer, the chief cook, the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the
If a snake is seen in a temple: the offerings of that temple will continue for a long time.
... I have heard that he ...
1, of Aya-rame, ditto;
... they ...
... to ...
The king, my lord, should not be concerned about it.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have seen fear and terror at night, or jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
and the base of the wall ...
... you will see
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ahhe-eriba. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
La-qipu, ... ,
... , felted, ditto, ditto;
I have now written to the Palace ... ; let them do as they deem best.
The chariots of the king, my lord, ... ; the ... of the king, my lord, ... ; the cavalry of the king, my lord, ... ; the chariots of the magnates, my lords, ...
Witness Banitu-šallim. Witness Urdu-Nanaya.
... 17th day, the 6th day, the 8th day,
Now, Aššur-iddina ... has written to me: "The son of Zerî ... has written to me: 'The king of Babylon has written to me: 'The son of Zerî ... has written to me: 'The king of Babylon has written to me: 'The son of Zerî ... has written to me: 'The king of Babylon has written to me: 'The son of Zerî ... has written to me: 'The king of Babylon has written to me: 'The son of Zerî ... has written to me: 'The king of
To the king, my lord: your servant Šarru-emuranni. Good health to the king, my lord!
... the commandant
Balasî, ... ,
and the star of the path of the Anu stars ...
Witness NN.
... the king, my lord, ...
Witness Ibašši-ilani.
... copper ...
of the king, my lord ...
Uarbis, gardener; 1 son; 1 woman; 1 daughter; 1 son-in-law; 1 daughter-in-law; 1 son-in-law's son; 1 son-in-law's daughter; 1 son-in-law's daughter's daughter; 1 son-in-law's daughter's daughter's daughter;
(As for) Necho, king of the city Memphis, Šarru-lū-dāri, king of the city Pelusium, Pi-šan-Ḫuru, king of the city Natho, Pa-qruru, king of the city (Pi)šaptu, Inaros (Niḫerau), king of the city Athribis, (and) Naḫkê, king of the city Heracleopolis, those kings, governors, (and) officials whom the father who had engendered me had appointed in Egypt,
Concerning the news of the Urarṭian about which my lord wrote to me: "What is it?" — I have now asked the governor, and he told me that the Urarṭian is in the city of Urzuhina.
(As for) the governors, the nobles, and the people of the city Ekron who had thrown Padî, their king who was bound by treaty and oaths, into iron fetters and who had handed him over to Hezekiah of the land Judah in a hostile manner, they became frightened on account of the villainous acts they had committed.
... 3 ...
an estate of 4 hectares of land adjoining the village of Bel-ibni, adjoining the field of Bel-ibni,
Concerning the king my lord's subjects who are in the service of the magnates, about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let them give them to you" — I have received them, but they have not yet come in.
20 hectares of arable land, 10 hectares under cultivation therein.
... mules of the city of Calah
To the king, my lord: your servant ... Good health to the king, my lord!
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "... "
... the scribe ...
... he should come and give them to me
May a later prince restore it. May he restore my inscribed name to its place. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
... I have not seen ...
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let 300 men come with you" — I have sent 300 men with my messenger, but the men of the magnates have refused to let them in. The king, my lord, should ask the messenger of the magnates why they have refused to let them in.
I have now written to the Palace about it, and they will do as they deem best.
which in the king's presence ...
Adad-nārārī, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dān (II), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tiglath-pileser (II) (who was) also king of the universe (and) king of Assyria.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
From Rašil the older, servant of the king.
Total — the offerings of the Lady of Arbela.
Total 100 — the town Balaṭu.
until ...
... one who is loyal to the king ...
Total, the men from ...
... have received ...
... upon the king, my lord
From Balasî.
... to the king
... I will see
1 writing-board ...
The herald ...
When the king, my lord, sat on the throne, I sent Šamaš-šumu-ukin, my lord, to the king, my lord, saying: "Let me see the face of the king, my lord, and let me come and serve the king, my lord."
... I have not yet received the ... s of the ... s of the king, my lord. I am (now) sending them to the king, my lord.
the troops ...
... the king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the chief ...
... he has seized
The lower part is elevated ...
The chariot which goes to the Akitu House and comes back ...
What is it that the king, my lord, commands? Let them send me a sealed order concerning the matter which I have written to the king, my lord, and I shall do accordingly.
... upon you
Concerning the bull colossus about which my lord wrote to me, I have now finished the work and am herewith sending it to my lord.
As to Bel-iqiša about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send him to me?" — I sent him to the king, my lord, but he refused to come, saying: "I will not go without a sealed order from the Palace." I sent him a sealed order, but he still refused to come, saying: "I will not go without a sealed order from the Palace." I sent him a sealed order, but he still refused to come, saying: "I will not go without a sealed order from the Palace."
Witness Aššur-reṣuwa, chief scribe.
... this ...
... the king, my lord, has sent me ... , and I have received it.
... you will ...
of the bed ...
Witness Šamaš-ašared.
To the god Aššur, his lord, has Šamšī-Adad, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, dedicated (this).
and Nabû-šallim ...
Nabû-šezibanni, the haruspex, has said: "The moon will complete the day in Adar (XII)."
The 'third man' ...
I am a dead dog, but the king, my lord, revived me. He has given me confidence and made me stand (victoriously) over my enemies.
... estate ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your great divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
The king, my lord, should ask the governor of ... whether there is any  (such) house in the town of Maruru. If not, the king, my lord, should  ...
When the ... s came, they were given 300 (homers of) barley and 300 (homers of) wheat as their rations. The king, my lord, should know (this).
He said: "Nabû-eṭir ...
NN, farmer, and his people; ... -abu-uṣur, farmer, and his people;
Witness Zarutî, cohort commander.
Marduk-apla-iddina ...
... the magnates of the crown prince;
Witness Zababa-šarru-... , ...
The palace of Tiglath-pileser, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (I), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rabi (II) (who was) also king of the universe (and) king of Assyria: (brick) belonging to the forecourt of the House of the labūnu.
The king, my lord, knows that we are in the middle of the sea. We have sent the son of the chief judge, but he has not yet returned.
Month of Tishri (VII), ... th day, eponym year of Nabû-ahu-uṣur.
If the moon is surrounded by a halo, and the Pleiades stand in it: in this year women will give birth to male children.
The hand of Nabû-šuma-iškun, the hand of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), the hand of the god Nabû, the hand of the god Marduk, the hand of the great gods, the hand of the king, my lord, the hand of my lords, the hand of the god Nabû, the hand of the god Marduk, the hand of the king, my lord, the hand of the great gods, the hand of the king, my lord, the hand of my l
Witness Aplî.
The son of Yakin has ... ed on me. He is a ... ; he is not a ...
Witness Qanuni, village manager.
Now then I am sending him to the vizier, my lord.
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send them?" — I sent them to the Palace ... , but they did not agree to bring them ...
... the sheikh of Zamua
all the ... s of ...
... and they will not listen to me.
10 ... ;
... their ... and their seed ...
... the women
Ditto by Ištar of Arbela and Ištar of Nineveh!
In the future, may one of the kings, my descendants, whom the king of the god Aššur names for shepherding the land and people, read an inscription written in my name, and anoint (it) with oil, make an offering, (and) return (it) to its place. The god Aššur will (then) hear his prayers.
Witness Marduk-šumu-uṣur, royal bodyguard.
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The messenger of the king, my lord, has come with 100 men and 100 donkeys.
If the sun rises and the sky becomes red-brown: the land will experience joy ...
Witness Nuhšaya, porter.
1, Qurdi-Aššur, chief of the public works;
... the king, my lord, knows that ...
4 ... , x+100 (homers) wheat, 100 (homers) barley, 100 (homers) sesame oil, 100 (homers) ... ,
2 ... ;
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
As to what you wrote to me: "The people of Babylon have been incited to rebellion by the king of Elam" — I have now investigated and established that the king of Elam has indeed incited them. I have now written to you: "Do not fear, but guard the city and the people of Babylon, and keep them away from the king of Elam."
Nabû-apil-kumu'a, the king of Babylon, who against the will of the gods had come down to the territory of the land of Sumer and Akkad and had appropriated for himself the kingship of Babylon, turned to the king of the land Elam for aid. He put his trust in the sea (and its) surging waves and (thereby) he lost his life. He was swept away like a flood.
Bel-iqišanni,
Witness NN. Witness Barruqu.
I have now written to you: ...
Witness Ququî.
all ...
As to the shepherd ...
In the month of Shebat (XI) the moon will complete the day.
Total — the men from Byblos.
which is over ...
The people of the land of Akkad are exempt.
The king, my lord, should ask ...
A tablet of the palace scribe to the palace scribe, his lord. May Aššur and Mullissu bless my lord!
I have now written to you; do not be negligent but keep watch over them.
Nabû-eriba, son of Ša-Nabû-šû, ...
I will not give them anything.
Total 23 horses.
Month Ab (V), 16th day, eponym year of ...
The king, my lord, should ask Aššur-reṣuwa, the ... of the house of Bel-eṭir, whether he has ever ... ed a ... of the king, my lord.
... the troops of the Cimmerians ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-šumu-lešir. Good health to the king, my lord!
The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number.
You shall not do (anything) that is evil to Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, or to his brothers, sons by the same mother as Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, or to any other offspring of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, or to any other offspring of Assyria, or to any other offspring of Babylon, or to
The base of the middle part is 'loose.' The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number. The heart of the sheep is normal...
1 bowl of quinces;
At that time, the city Aššur, the great mountain, the city of the gods, the city of the god Enlil, the city of the god Anu, the city of the god Ea, the city of the god Sîn, the city of the god Adad, the city of the god Ninurta, the city of the god Nergal, the city of the god Nusku, the city of the goddess Ištar, the city of the great gods, the city of Assyria, the city of Babylon, the city of Sumer and Akk
NN, ... ;
... in the month of Iyyar (II)
Concerning the news of the son of Yakin, he is in Babylon. The king, my lord, should ask the son of Yakin whether he is a citizen of Babylon or a citizen of Borsippa.
40 ... ,
The king, my lord, should not be worried about it.
Nabû-šumu-iškun, scribe, keeper of the contract.
The army of the Cimmerians has set out towards the land of the Qumānu.
... to my lord
... house, 2 ... , ...
which they bring ...
... I have sent ...
... who ...
Concerning the 16 horses about which the king, my lord, wrote to me,
Concerning the offerings about which you wrote, they should be made in the month of Sivan (III).
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the troops of the Cimmerians, or the troops of the Scythians, or the troops of the Medes, or any other enemy, will mount a dangerous attack against the magnates and governors of Bit-Kari and Parsumaš, and the troops of the king, my lord, who are in Bit-Kari and Parsumaš,
Witness Nabû-balassu-iqbi, overseer of the household.
The money is paid completely. That field is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Witness NN, of the town of Abi-duri.
... what is it that the king, my lord, says?
If the Pleiades come close to the top of the moon and stand there: the great gods will make a favorable decision about the land.
... vegetable garden ...
their blood ...
... Aššur-šarru-uṣur
To the king, my lord: your servant Mannu-ki-Adad. Good health to the king, my lord!
... 1/7 ... of ...
As to the news of the son of Bel-iddina, the king, my lord, should ask the ... official ...
Witness NN, 'third man' of the magnates.
30 chariots, 30 cavalry, 50 shield-spearmen, 50 archers, 50 lancers, 50 shield-spearmen of the chief cupbearer, 50 shield-spearmen of the chief treasurer, 50 shield-spearmen of the chief eunuch, 50 shield-spearmen of the chief judge, 50 shield-spearmen of the chief confectioner, 50 shield-spearmen of the chief cook, 50 shield-spearmen
Ditto, ditto; just as a snake and a mongoose do not enter the same hole to lie there together but think only of cutting each other's throat, so may you and your women not enter the same room to lie down in the same bed.
to the king, my lord, ...
... blood ...
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Sagab (651).
the rest ...
Seal of Šu... ,
Nabû-zeru-iqiša;
... the Sealand
(As for) the one who removes my inscription and my name: May the god Aššur, my lord, overthrow his sovereignty (and) destroy his name (and) his seed from the land.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... the town of Zabban, the people
the Itu'eans ...
2, Ahi-... , ...
... Šamaš ...
(As for) the messengers of the Urarṭian, who had gone to the city Ištiaru, I captured (them) alive and brought (them) to my city Aššur.
The palace of the king, my lord, is well; the mood of the city is good; the king, my lord, can be glad indeed. The king, my lord, should come out and enter the palace on the 1st of Nisan (I).
... the sheikh ... will not listen to us.
Disregard that ... to the Babylonians ...
... the barley rations ... of Aššur-...
Your servant, the governor of Nippur: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! May Enlil, Ninurta, and Nusku bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
If the moon becomes visible in Sivan (III) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
Witness Nabû-naṣir, horse trainer of the palace herald.
The messenger of the son of Zerî has come.
I sent a messenger to the son of Yakin, saying: "Let him come and enter the city; ... the ... of the son of Yakin ... "
(As for) the city Ukku, which is in the district of the city Ḫalbuda, (and) which ... the goddess Ištar ... the goddess Ištar ... the goddess Ištar ... the goddess Ištar ... the goddess Ištar ... the goddess Ištar ... the goddess Ištar ... the goddess Ištar ... the goddess Ištar ... the goddess Ištar ... the goddess Ištar ... the goddess Ištar ... the goddess Ištar ... the goddess Ištar
If the moon and sun are in opposition: the king of the land will widen his understanding.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-ṣil-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
... the palace superintendent has given me ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
I have heard that the chief eunuch has said: "I will send you ... "
the 'well-being' to ...
... the fort ...
1, the son of Yakin ... ,
Witness Šumma-ilani.
1 prayer bowl ditto;
And as to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "The city of Akkad is in revolt" — I have now captured the city and am herewith sending the king, my lord, the messenger of the city-lord.
... as long as the king of Babylon ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your great divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
The son of Zerî, the son of Bel-eṭir, the son of Aššur-aplu-iddina, the son of Nabû-šezib, the son of Nabû-šuma-iškun, the son of Nabû-šuma-iddina, the son of Nabû-šuma-iddina, the son of Nabû-šuma-iddina, the son of Nabû-šuma-iddina, the son of Nabû-šuma-iddina, the son of Nabû-
or a 'qiqî-house man' or a 'lamentation-priest' or a 'house-man' or a 'temple-enterer' or a 'temple-assistant' or a 'temple-steward' or a 'temple-guard' or a 'temple-overseer' or a 'temple-custodian' or a 'temple-enterer' or a 'temple-assistant' or a 'temple-steward' or a 'temple-overseer' or a 'temple-c
5 talents, the city Alihu;
Should Assurbanipal, son of the great crown prince designate, appoint him to the position which is written in this papyrus?
Salamanu, Nabû-šar-ahhešu, and the woman Bannâ, a total of 3 persons —
Month Iyyar (II), 1st day, eponym year of Kanunayu, the  prefect of the city (Calah).
The king, my lord, should send a bodyguard with me, so I can go and see the work being done in Dur-Šarruken. The king, my lord, should also send a bodyguard with me, so I can go and see the work being done in Nineveh.
On account of this, O god Marduk, great lord, when you look upon this table with pleasure, (and) when this table is set (and) regular, ceaseless offerings are presented, may the god Šulpa'e, lord of the table, speak well of Aššur-etel-ilani, king of Assyria, your favorite ruler, before the god Marduk, your great lord, and may he determine as his fate a long life, fullness of old age, good health, and happiness! May he make the foundation of his royal throne secure for
... the army of the god Enlil
Month Adar (XII), 30th day, eponym year of Adad-šumu-uṣur.
Witness Bel-abu'a.
La-qipu, ... ;
7 big loaves;
The chariot-driver brings in the whip of the god and the whip of the king, and places them before the god.
I have heard that the king, my lord, has ordered the people of Borsippa to be deported. If it is agreeable to the king, my lord, let them deport the people of Borsippa and settle them in the steppe.
At that time, the wall of my city Aššur, which Aššur-nādin-aḫḫē, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-dān (II), vice-regent of the god Aššur, my forefather, had previously built — that wall had become old and (v 10) dilapidated. I cleared away its debris down to the foundation pit. I rebuilt (it) from top to bottom. I deposited my monumental inscriptions. I deposited my clay
... the Babylonians ...
The messenger of the king, my lord, came to me on the 12th of Tammuz (IV). I am herewith sending him to the king, my lord.
The king's word to the governor of Calah: I am well; you can be glad.
he is my servant ...
Witness NN, royal bodyguard.
to the goddess Ištar ...
... the gods of the king ... the king ...
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur, eunuch.
The priest of DN, the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ...
The chariots which he dispatched ...
Adad-apla-iddina, king of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, son of the goddess Ištar, the one who provides for Ur, the one who renovates Eanna, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of the great gods, am I:
The king, my lord, should ask the chief of the accounts department.
On the 13th day, the king, my lord, said: "Why did you not remind me?" I reminded him, but he said: "I did not remind me."
... the king, my lord, ... I have sent ... to the king, my lord. The ... s of the king, my lord, have been received and deposited in the ... of the king, my lord. The ... of the king, my lord, has been received and deposited in the ... of the king, my lord.
Witness ... ayu, ...
In the future may a later prince, when that wall becomes old and dilapidated, restore it. May he restore my inscribed name and my monumental inscription to its place. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
To the goddess Ištar, his lady: Sargon (II), presented (this object).
Concerning the news of the king, my lord, I have heard that he is in Babylon. I have sent my messenger to him, but he has not yet returned; he is still there.
If the sky is covered with red: ...
The man who wrote to you, saying: "Why did you write to me in this way? You should have written in this way to the Palace!" — he wrote in this way to the Palace because of the matter which he wrote to you.
I wrote to him: "You are a citizen of Assyria; you have the usufruct of the king's protection. You are a citizen of Assyria; you have the usufruct of the king's protection. You are a citizen of Assyria; you have the usufruct of the king's protection."
Seal of Nabû-naṣir, scribe.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
I have heard that you have gone ...
... the upper part, the lower part, the middle part,
2,000 ... ,
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "The gods of the king, my lord, have been well" — they have indeed been well.
a ditto of wine;
The king, my lord, should ask Bel-eṭir and the scribe of the house of Aššur-naṣir. They know the story.
Mannu-ki-... ,
from you ...
... he said to me
... his ...
Good health to my lord!
The king's word to the commander-in-chief: I am well; you can be glad.
... the Chaldean
Ubru-Nabû, farmer; his wife; 2 sons; 1 daughter; 10 hectares of arable land; 1 house.
... the son of Anu
The palace herald, the overseer of the household of the crown prince, the palace manager of the household of the crown prince, the chief cupbearer, the chief confectioner, the chief baker, the chief cook, the chief brewer, the chief son-in-law, the chief daughter-in-law, the chief treasurer, the chief accountant, the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... , the chief ... ,
The king, my lord, should ask the cohort commander Aššur-belu-taqqin about the boats. He has 100 boats, but he has not yet brought them all. He has brought 80, but the remaining 20 are still outstanding. The cohort commander Aššur-belu-taqqin has received the boats from the boatmen, but he has not yet received the rest of the boats from the boatmen.
Mannu-ki-Adad, ... ; NN, chariot-driver; NN, ... ; NN, ... ;
Bel-iqiša, the chief victualler, has contracted and bought him from Il-amar for 1 1/2 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
I tore down that small palace in its entirety. I diverted the course of the Tebilti River from the center of the city and directed its outflow into the meadow behind the city.
... the king, my lord
Witness Ki-Aya.
Witness Balassu, major-domo of the palace.
A tablet of ... -ila'i to the king, my lord, (regarding) the son of Zerî.
The base of the 'finger' is split.
Month of Sivan (III), eponym year of Ša-Nabû-šû.
... said to me ...
Now, ever since the king, my lord, appointed me, I have been keeping watch over him, and he has been keeping watch over me. He has not, however, kept watch over me in the same way as I have kept watch over him. He has seized my servants and given them to my enemy.
Witness Še...
20, in the charge of Ginni-huru,
Witness ... -Nabû.
Concerning the ... about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "They should bring it to you" — we have brought it to the Palace, but they have not yet brought it to me.
They are free from "boat and crossbar"; they are free from "corn taxes"; they shall not pay "tribute" to the governor.
... of the year before last
1 seah 1 'litre' of spiced bread; a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your great divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
... to the magnates
... the Enlil of the gods,
The god Aššur, king of the gods, the one who decrees fates, the one who dwells in Eḫursaggalkurkurra, the great mountain, the one who dwells in Eḫursaggula, the one who dwells in Eḫursaggula, the one who dwells in Eḫursaggula, the one who dwells in Eḫursaggula, the one who dwells in Eḫursaggula, the one who dwells in Eḫursaggula, the one who dwells in Eḫursaggula, the one who dwell
... the names of the ... s
... the palace herald
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
... to Nabû'a
Now, if it is agreeable to him, let him appoint him over the scouts.
I marched to the land Bīt-Ḫamban, which had rebelled against me. I conquered the city Bīt-Ḫamban, together with cities in its environs. I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, and brought (them) to my city, Aššur.
An estate of one hectare ... , adjoining ...
... they have appointed ...
... the king's messenger ...
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
Bel and Nabû ...
If a snake is seen in a temple: ... will be made ...
an estate of 4 decares adjoining Ubru-Nabû,
The king, my lord, can be glad. May Aššur, Šamaš, Bel and Nabû bless the king, my lord.
Witness Mannu-lu-šalim, royal bodyguard.
I have now written to the king, my lord; the king, my lord, may do as he deems best. The king, my lord, should not be afraid of the ... s.
Nabû-kenu-uṣur,
(As for) the cities Bīt-Imbî, Bīt-Daganna, Joppa, Banayabarqa, (and) Azuru, which are on the shore of the great sea, which are on the other side of the land Ḫatti, (and) which had not been visited by the kings, my ancestors, I marched to them. By sea and dry land, I took the road and traveled (there). I received tribute from the kings of the land Ḫatti, (and) I imposed upon them hostages, tax, (
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: dispersal of the Westland.
... I have sent ...
... I am a dead dog. Aššur-Aššur, my lord, revived me and placed me in the service of the king, my lord. May Aššur, my lord, keep me alive forever and may I serve the king, my lord.
Witness Su'al.
The palace herald, the governor of Nineveh, the governor of Calah, the governor of Arrapha, the governor of Dur-Šarruken, the governor of Isana, the governor of Til-Barsip, the governor of Dur-Šarruken, the governor of Dur-Šarruken, the governor of Dur-Šarruken, the governor of Dur-Šarruken, the governor of Dur-Šarruken, the governor of Dur-Šarruken, the governor of Dur-Šarruken, the governor of Dur-Šar
I will not ...
I have heard that he has gone to the city of Zabban.
As to the work on the river about which you wrote to me: "The men and horses have not yet arrived" —
Witness Zarutî, chariot driver of the crown prince.
... my ...
Witness Sin-zeru-ibni, ...
Fingernail of Zababa-eriba, owner of the garden being sold.
the troops ...
If a planet comes close to the top of the moon and stops: the king will exercise world dominion; his land will expand.
Palace of Tiglath-pileser (III), great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of Sumer (and) Akkad, king of the four quarters (of the world), the one chosen by the glance of the god Enlil, the one who from his childhood trusted in the gods Aššur, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), and Nabû, the one who has always contested with all enemies of Aššur above and below and imposed upon them tribute and tax, the one who has always
I have seen ...
... the sheikh
... Nabû of ...
Total, in the town of Sarugi, in the district of the town of Sarugi, in the province of the chief treasurer.
Does your great divinity know it? Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Witness Ša-Nabû-šû, cohort commander.
... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I
Kiṣir-Issar, chief tailor;
The ... s of the left ...
they have sent ...
... who ...
... Babylon ...
From Nabû-bel-šumati.
The city-rulers of the cities Ashdod, Sidon, Byblos, (and) Arwad, the kings of the land Amurru, the sheikhs of the land Moab, the kings of the land Edom, the kings of the land Ammon, the kings of the land Moab, the kings of the land Edom, the kings of the land Ammon, the kings of the land Moab, the kings of the land Edom, the kings of the land Ammon, the kings of the land Moab, the kings of the land Edom, the kings
(As for) Iaū-biʾdī (Ilu-biʾdī), hardship befell him and he fled alone. I seized the chariots, horses, wagons, (and) mules that he had abandoned in the thick of battle. I captured Šūzubu (Nergal-ušēzib), the king of Babylon, (and) I carried off his royal daughter, his palace women, (and) his sons as booty.
... 20 hectares of field in the town of Abi-...
From Zakir.
Shalmaneser, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria:
before ...
As to what the king wrote to me: "You are a servant of Aššur-belu-taqqin; he has appointed you in the service of Aššur-belu-taqqin" — I am a servant of Aššur-belu-taqqin, and he has appointed me in the service of Aššur-belu-taqqin. May Aššur, Šamaš, Bel and Nabû bless the king, my lord!
... Aššur-ila'i
Witness Ahi-qamu.
5 towers, 32 1/2 cubits each, the ziggurrat of the god Adad;
If the moon becomes visible in the path of the Enlil stars: there will be a flood.
Witness Yakin-Lû, son of Aya-...
Bel-na'id ... , son of Nabû-apal-iddin ... , son of ... , son of ... , son of ... , son of ... , son of ... , son of ... , son of ... , son of ... , son of ... , son of ... , son of ... , son of ... , son of ... , son of ... , son of ... , son of ... , son of ... , son of ... , son of ... , son of ... , son of ... , son of ... , son of ... , son of ... , son of ... , son of ... , son of ... ,
... 16 talents, the weavers;
Month Adar (XII), 20th day, eponym year of Mar-larim.
On the 13th day the king goes down to the House of God. He illuminates the face. The chanters ... The king ... s the purification device. The king strews salt. The singer intones, “... ”
adjoining ...
... Babylon ...
or Muqalli...
Witness Sukkannu.
Ditto by all the gods of Nineveh!
At that time, I made the goddess Ištar, mistress of the city Arbela, my lady, enter into Eanna (and) made (her) reside on (her) eternal dais in the house of the gods Anu and Enlil. I offered sumptuous offerings before her (and) presented (her) with my gifts. I made her (text: “him”) great and (re)confirmed her lordship...
6 oxen ...
... Zarpanitu ...
... his ...
adjoining the field of Nabû-duru-uṣur,
Ashur-iddin,
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. Good health to the king, my lord!
If in the month of your watch the wind blows: the flood will come.
Now, what is it that the king, my lord, commands?
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-zeru-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord.
from the town of Dad...
If a planet becomes visible in Elul (VI): the land will experience joy.
The messenger of Bel-iqiša, the messenger of the son of Yakin, the messenger of the son of Yata', the messenger of the son of Zababa, the messenger of the son of Gubaba, the messenger of the son of Uraš, the messenger of the son of Nabû-šuma-iškun, the messenger of the son of Bel-šuma-iškun, the messenger of the son of Nabû-šuma-iškun, the messenger of the son of N
1 ditto, 1 seah, regular;
When the king, my lord, sat on the throne, I sent my messenger to Umman-minâ, saying: "Let him send me the people who are in his possession, so I can give them to the king, my lord." He refused to give them.
I have now asked the ... s: "Why did you ... the ... s of the king, my lord, ... ?"
... to ...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the 11th day of this month, Iyyar (II), to the 10th day of the month Sivan (III) of this year, 30 days and nights, my stipulated term,
of Su...
the deputy (governor),
If the earth quakes at night: worry for the land.
At that time, I marched to the land Šarnida, which is in the distant mountains, (and) I conquered the extensive land of the Qumānu. I captured their fortified cities, (and) plundered them. I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire their cities.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... the land of Sūḫu
The king, our lord, knows that we are servants who keep the watch of their lord. We have kept the watch of our lord ever since we were small children, and we have not failed to do our duty. Now, ever since the king, our lord, appointed us, we have kept the watch of our lord and not sinned against our lord. Now, when we heard that the king, our lord, had been taken prisoner, we sent our messengers to him, saying: "We have not sinned against our lord; we have kept the watch of our lord."
... the magnates
at the disposal of Nabû-zeru-lešir, mayor of Nineveh.
Your servant Nabû-naṣir: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: I have sent my messenger to the king, my lord, but he has not yet returned. May the king, my lord, send him back quickly!
Witness Aplu-uṣur.
I, the great lord, the king, the one who is assiduous towards their shrines, the one who is assiduous towards their daises, the one who is assiduous towards their rites, the one who is assiduous towards their festivals, the one who is assiduous towards their sattukku offerings, the one who is assiduous towards their nindabû offerings, the one who is assiduous towards their lalgar (= purification ritual), the one who is assiduous towards their namburbi ritual, the one who is assid
Witness Nabû-ahu-uṣur, scribe.
Concerning the substitute king about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "He should sit (on the throne) until the 10th day" —
2, Ša-Nabû-šû, cohort commander;
He shall pay the capital sum in its principal amount in the month of Tishri (VII).
Total, the men from the town of Kar-Sin.
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-alik-pani. Good health to the king, my lord!
To the goddess Ištar, his lady: Adad-nārārī, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-dān (II), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Tiglath-pileser (II) (who was) also vice-regent of the god Aššur:
If Adad thunders on the day of disappearance of the moon: the flood will ...
Month Adar (XII), 12th day, eponym year of Banbâ, the  prefect of the city Calah.
The chariot-driver brings in the whip of the chief eunuch, places it before the chariot-driver, and says: "I will go and see the face of the chief eunuch." He goes and sees the face of the chief eunuch, and the chariot-driver places the whip of the chief eunuch before the chariot-driver, and says: "I will go and see the face of the king."
in all 5 persons, belonging to the woman Ubru-Nabû —
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the crown prince. I have been appointed to the service of the crown prince, my lord, and I have given my word to the crown prince, my lord. Now, the crown prince, my lord, has dismissed me from the service of the crown prince, my lord, and has appointed me to the service of the palace herald.
Concerning the boats about which you wrote to me, I have sent you 100 water-skin rafts, but they have not yet arrived.
Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
I, the weak (and) powerless one who is assiduous towards the lord of lords, am the one who reveres the great lord, the god Marduk. I am the one who is assiduous towards the lord of lords (and) the one who reveres the great lord, the god Marduk. I am the one who is assiduous towards the lord of lords (and) the one who reveres the great lord, the god Marduk.
11 shekels of silver, of ... , for ... ;
or through lack (of soldiers), or through lack (of chariots), or through lack (of horses), or through lack (of mules), or through lack (of donkeys),
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
... , ... -ili,
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial audience gift from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
the king ... as ...
... of ...
I have sent ...
11 shekels of silver ...
The sons of Sin-šarru-uṣur, who are in Assyria, have not seen their father.
Total, x+1 house.
1 ... ;
If the moon at its appearance wears a crown: the king will reach the highest rank.
Remutu,
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant who is loyal to his lord. I have ... ed on ... and ... ed on ...
... the king's subjects who are in my service
... I made ... enter into the treaty and oath (sworn by the names of) the great gods, my lords, and I made (them) take an oath (sworn by the names of) the great gods, my lords, concerning the treaty and oath (sworn by the names of) the great gods, my lords, and I made (them) swear (it) as an oath by the names of the great gods, my lords.
(As for) the one who alters my inscribed object (and) disrespects my words, who does evil against me (and) my offspring, may (the god) Aššur, the great lord, glare at him angrily and determine a bad fate for him! May he make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the lands and have no pity on him! May he (the god Aššur) make his name (and) his seed disappear from the land of Sumer and Akkad! May he have no pity on him forever!
Concerning the news of the son of Yakin: he is in Babylon. The king, my lord, should send a letter to the son of Yakin, telling him to come and stay with me, until I send him the king, my lord's messenger.
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
2 full-grown (goats), 10 (goats) of weaned (kids).
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
the son of Zazaya
Instead of their seals they impressed their fingernails.
Peace is between them.
The goddess Ištar, mistress of the gods, who in her anger had abandoned her inner sanctum (and) had taken up residence in a place not befitting her, relented during the favorable reign (lit. “my favorable reign”) that (the god) Aššur had granted me. To complete (the emblem of) her exalted divinity, she constantly kept sending me (instructions) through dream(s and) message(s) from ecstatics.
Assurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), offspring of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, descendant of Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria —
in the month of ...
1, Zabinu, the scribe.
50, the chief victualler;
... the city of Kiš, the lord of ...
I have now written to you; ... and do whatever is good to me.
... Month Adar (XII), 22nd day, eponym year of NN.
The 16th day, which they call the Silence: ... the moon ...
... have seized
Aššur has arranged a feast in Ešarra.
... the king, my lord ...
in the house of my lord, ...
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
(As for) Tammarītu, king of the land Elam, who had spoken insolent word(s) on account of the cutting off of the head of Teumman —
... 100 sheep
(As for) the one who erases my inscribed name and writes his (own) name or discards my monumental inscription, may the god Aššur, my lord, overthrow his sovereignty, destroy his name and his seed from the land, and ... make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the land.
... let him do
As to what you wrote to me: "The people of the land of Akkad are not loyal" — I have now written to you: if you are loyal to Assyria, you will see that the people of Akkad are loyal to Assyria.
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... Arrapha ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
Now ...
... the king, my lord, has sent me to the city of Aššur. I have received the ... s of the city of Aššur and deposited them in the storehouse.
To the king, my lord: your servant Issar-nadin-apli. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May the great gods bestow long days, well-being and joy upon the king, my lord!
9 towns ...
Witness Nabû-...
Aššur-da''in-šarru, ... ;
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
4 ... -garments ... ;
If the king, my lord, orders, I shall send the man to the Palace.
8 polyptychs ... ,
... have come
This is the interpretation of Aššur.
Concerning the offerings about which my lord wrote to me: "They should be made in the month of Tishri (VII)" — I have made them, but the weather has been hot, and my lord knows that the offerings cannot be made in this heat.
When I heard that ... had been plundered, I sent ... to the city, saying: "Go and see whether there is any ... , and if there is, bring it to me!" He went and looked, but there was no ... ; he returned and reported to me: "There is no ... "
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: good for Akkad, bad for Elam.
Month Iyyar (II), ... th day, eponym year of NN, governor of ...
... saying: "...
... I will go down to the river
... of the chief ...
... of the magnates of the house of the chief eunuch
in my presence ...
Witness Ṭab-...
... the sheikh of ...
In the month of Sivan (III), on the 12th day, I marched to the city Ashdod, which is in the district of the city Arrapḫa. I received the tribute of the kings of the land Amurru. I received the tribute of the kings of the land Byblos. I received the tribute of the kings of the land Sidon. I received the tribute of the kings of the land Byblos. I received the tribute of the kings of the land Arwad. I received the tribute of the kings of the land Byblos
... of the land of Yadburu
they should bring to me ...
... the father of the father who had engendered me
I marched to the land of the people of Ḫatti. I conquered the city Sarrabānu, the royal city of the land of the people of Ḫatti. I carried off the booty of his palace, the property of his palace, his palace women, his daughters, his sons, his property, his possessions, his goods, his treasure, his palace, his palace women, his daughters, his sons, his property, his possessions, his goods, his treasure, his palace, his property, his possessions, his goods, his treasure, his palace, his
Witness Mannu-ki-Arbail, scribe.
1, Aya-ammu, son of Ri... ;
Nabû-šezibanni will provide 400 (homers of) barley.
An estate of 1 hectare 1 decare of field adjoining the side road of the village of Zizî, adjoining the field of Ubru-Nabû,
After I had finished the work on my palace, I invited inside it the god Aššur, the great lord, (and) the gods and goddesses living in Assyria, and (then) I made splendid offerings and presented my gift(s). I made fine oil from olives and aromatics. At the inauguration of the palace, I had the heads of the subjects of my land drenched (and) I watered their insides with sweet wine. (viii 10'') I made fine oil from olives and aromatics. At the inauguration
Witness Mar-nuri.
Ashur-dan (III),
4 ... ,
... are present. The 'path' is curled...
He (the god Marduk) commanded me to complete the cult centers, to renovate the shrines, (and) to organize well the rites of Esagil, the palace of the gods. Every month, the gods Sîn and Šamaš together, at their appearance, answered me with a firm ‘yes’ concerning the avenging of Akkad.
(As for) the one who alters my inscribed object (and) disrespects my words, may the goddess Ištar, mistress of the city Arbela, ...
At that time, I made the enemy people whom I had captured carry baskets (of earth) and they made bricks. I mixed (the mud for) the foundations of the terrace with (ritually) pure oil (and) aromatics.
Witness NN, ša šēpi guard.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sargon (II), (who was also) great king, mighty king, king of the world, and king of Assyria.
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in my mouth...
Witness Aššur-šallim, ditto.
... &  beer  &  ...
You shall not change nor alter the wording of this tablet. You and your sons and your grandsons shall not be exempted from it. You shall not say: "I will not obey the wording of this tablet." You shall not say: "I will not comply with the wording of this tablet." You shall not say: "I will not be bound by the wording of this tablet." You shall not say: "I will not be punished for disobedience to this tablet." You shall not say: "I will not be punished for disobedience to this tablet."
The 28th day.
30,000 — NN;
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhe, conscript.
... s, cavalry, ...
At that time, I marched to the land Ḫabḫu, which is in the midst of the sea. I conquered the cities Mār-bīti, Ṣimirra, Arqâ, (and) Ummanaldašu, the fortified cities of the land Ḫabḫu, together with the small cities in their environs. I carried off their booty, possessions, (and) property, (as well as) their gods (and) goddesses, their property (and) possessions, (and) their goods,
Witness ...
5 shekels of silver, capital, belonging to Šarru-lu-dari, at the disposal of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, son of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, from the town of Dur-Šarruken.
Total, 6 ... of the town of ... -iqbi.
Whoever in the future, at any time,
6 bags of (mixed) kernels.
1 ox, 1 sheep, 1 duck, 10 jars of wine, 10 jars of beer, 10 jars of wine, 10 jars of beer, 10 jars of wine, 10 jars of beer, 10 jars of wine, 10 jars of beer, 10 jars of wine, 10 jars of beer, 10 jars of wine, 10 jars of beer, 10 jars of wine, 10 jars of beer, 10 j
The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number...
I shall do the king's work ...
Total, of the men from Bubilu.
To the king, my lord: your servant PN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Remutti-il or his sons or his grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Šumma-ilani, his sons and his grandsons, shall pay 10 minas of silver to the god Marduk, his lord.
8,000 (hectares) of arable land, 1,000 (hectares) under cultivation therein; 1 house; 1 threshing-floor; 1 orchard; 1 well; 1 ... ; 1 ... ; 1 ... ; 1 ... ; 1 ... ; 1 ... ; 1 ... ; 1 ... ; 1 ... ; 1 ... ; 1 ... ; 1 ... ; 1 ... ; 1 ... ; 1 ... ; 1 ... ; 1 ... ; 1 ... ;
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, wise prince, circumspect ruler, shepherd of the people of Assyria, (and) leader of a widespread population, I: I had a palace built anew in the city Tarbiṣu as the residence of Ashurbanipal, the senior son of the king, my lord, and I laid out a garden (and) planted all kinds of aromatic plants (and) fruit trees in it.
Total, in the charge of Bel-aplu-iddina, ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nadin-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord!
Ashur-ilaya,
... the town of Hari...
... the city god
... upon them ...
Egišhurankia, “House which carries the designs of heaven and earth”: the house of the Lady of Nineveh.
On account of this, when the god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises, (i 5') he made all of the black-headed (people) from the Upper Sea of the Setting Sun to the Lower Sea of the Rising Sun bow down at my feet; they (now) pull my yoke. Thus did recalcitrant rulers come to fear battle with me. While they were abandoning their settlements, (i 10') they
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not remind me?" — I am now reminding the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, not forsake me!
... the army of Šamaš-...
Concerning the news of the Urarṭian, he is in the city Upa, and his magnates are staying with him. He has not set out for the king my lord's presence, but has sent his messenger to me.
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also great king, strong king, king of the world, and king of Assyria; valiant man who acts with the support of Aššur, his lord, and has no rival among the princes of the four quarters, marvelous shepherd
1 female cupbearer ... ;
... let them do
I have sent the servants of the king, my lord, to the Inner City, saying: "Let them ... the ... s of the king, my lord, and ... the ... s of the king, my lord."
with ...
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 21st day, eponym year of Banbâ.
At the beginning of my reign, when I sat in greatness on (my) royal throne, good signs were established for me; in heaven and on earth, he (the god Marduk) constantly sent me his omen(s). The angry gods were reconciled (and) they repeatedly disclosed favorable signs concerning the (re)entering of Esagil and the renovation of Babylon.
... the god Aššur, the great mountain, ... the gods of heaven and earth, ... the gods of Assyria, the gods of Babylonia, the gods of the land of Sumer and Akkad, the gods of the land of the Qutu, the gods of the land of the Uqumanu, the gods of the land of the Šubaru, the gods of the land of the Šilānu, the gods of the land of the Lullumu, the gods of the land of the Šabraku, the gods of the land of the Nairi
(As for) the one who removes my inscription and my name: May the gods Sîn, Šamaš, Adad, and the Assyrians, the gods who support me, overthrow his sovereignty; may they destroy his name (and) his seed from the land; may the goddess Ištar, mistress of war, break his weapons; may the goddess Bēlat-parṣī, mistress of the city Kār-Tukultī-Ninurta, ... his city; may the god Nabû, scribe of the
The king, my lord, knows that the men of the house of the chief eunuch are loyal to the king, my lord.
at the disposal of Ubru-Nabû, ...
Šumma-ilani has contracted and bought him from Mannu-ki-Aššur for one mina of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in my mouth...
Witness Bel-na'id.
1, the chariot driver of the crown prince; 15, the 'third men' of the palace;
The king, my lord, should know it.
2 ... , chief ... ;
... the xth day;
... the servant who reveres the great gods, the one who is assiduous towards their shrines, the one who is assiduous towards their rites, the one who is assiduous towards their processions, the one who is assiduous towards their festivals, the one who is assiduous towards their sattukku offerings, the one who is assiduous towards their nindabû offerings, the one who is assiduous towards their lalgar (= purification ritual), the one who is assiduous towards their namburbi ritual, the one who is ass
Nabû-šezibanni, the ... of the governor of ... , has contracted and bought him from ... , from the ... of the palace, from the ... of the governor of Calah, from the ... of the governor of Arrapha, from the ... of the governor of Dur-Šarruken, from the ... of the governor of Nineveh, from the ... of the governor of Isana, from the ... of the governor of Kilizi, from the ... of the governor of Til-Barsip, from the ... of the governor of Dur-Šarruken, from
If Adad shouts on a day without clouds: there will be darkness.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, and whom Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, has taken into his entourage, and whom he is ... , and whom he is ... , and whom he is ... , and whom he is ... , and whom he is ... , and whom he is ... , and whom he is ... , and whom he is ... , and whom he is ... , and whom he is ... , and whom he is ... , and whom he is ... , and whom he
Palace of Aššur-rēša-iši, king of the universe, king of Assyria.
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... "
of the palace ... of the Itu'eans ...
... I have not yet received the rest of the tribute. Now, if it is agreeable to him, let him send me the rest of the tribute. If not, let him send me the ... of the king, my lord, and I will receive it and give it to the king, my lord.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your great divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
as we ...
I captured the city Qarqar, which is on the bank of the Tigris River, and added (it) to the province of the chief cupbearer.
1,100 rams, 1,000 ewes, 1,000 spring lambs, 1,000 (male) kids, 1,000 (female) kids, 1,000 (male) kids, 1,000 (female) kids, 1,000 (male) kids, 1,000 (female) kids, 1,000 (male) kids, 1,000 (female) kids, 1
I have ... ed the ... s
You shall not make common cause with (any)one who may revolt against Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, concerning whom he has concluded (this) treaty with you, but, should they seize you by force, you shall flee and come to Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
... the king, my lord, should know
If he appoints him, as long as he holds this position, will he instigate an insurrection and rebellion against Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, and Assurbanipal, the crown prince of the Succession Palace?
Witness Muqallil-Marduk, scribe.
... I have seen
or through lack (of soldiers), or through lack (of horses), or through lack (of chariots), or through lack (of wagons),
to ...
the ... s of the son of Zerî ...
x minas of silver, one toga: the Chief Judge.
Witness Šulmu-beli-lašme, Hatezaean.
and when he said ...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the 11th day of this month, Iyyar (II), to the 10th day of the month Sivan (III) of this year, 30 days and nights, my stipulated term,
I asked him where the boats are. He said: "They are at the quay of the city of Til-Barsip. The boats of the people of Uruk are with them."
... the town of Hal...
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract, whether these men or their sons or grandsons,
I asked him: "Why did you ... ? If you ... , why did you ... ? If you ... , why did you ... ? If you ... , why did you ... ?
... I have heard that he has gone to the Palace ...
If the sun rises in the middle of the sky and the sky becomes red-brown: there will be a flood.
... the Tigris River, a river of abundance
The king should not say: "Why did you not tell me?"
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
Witness Il-šumma-uṣur, royal bodyguard.
... I have not heard any report
shall place 10 minas of silver and one mina of gold in the lap of Belanu residing in Hirana, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners.
He took it as a loan. It shall increase by a fourth.
... Witness Inurta-šarru-uṣur.
... to the governor
If the moon is surrounded by a halo, and the Pleiades stand in it: women will give birth to male children.
Witness Nabû-šezib.
... to ...
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... 8, in the charge of Arbailayu,
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, chariot driver of the crown prince.
... , saying: "I shall go
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The money is paid completely. That ... is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
the chief ...
As to the news of the son of Yakin, he is in Babylon.
... he has seized ... and brought him into my presence.
... of the heart ...
Town of Abi-ul-idi, near the town of Harran.
... Nabû, venerable heir, ... , who dwells in Ezida, the great lord, his lord:
Should Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, appoint the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity to the position which is written in this papyrus?
I have now written to the king, my lord. If it pleases the king, my lord, let them send me a sealed order concerning the son of Aššur-belu-taqqin, and let him come and stay with me. I shall send him to the king, my lord, as soon as he has returned from the presence of the king, my lord. I shall also send him a sealed order concerning the son of Aššur-belu-taqqin, and he too should come and stay with me.
Zeru-ukin, son of Rīmūt-Ninurta,
Concerning the men about whom you wrote to me, I have sent them to you. Let them stay with you, and let them do the work that you assigned to them. Let them be in your presence, and let them speak to you about the matters which you know. Do not ... to them, but ... to them!
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šarru-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
... I will not let you live
... he/they will not ... and he/they will not ... , and he/they will not ... and he/they will not ... , and he/they will not ... and he/they will not ... , and he/they will not ... and he/they will not ... , and he/they will not ... and he/they will not ... , and he/they will not ... and he/they will not ... , and he/they will not ... and he/they will not ... , and he/they will not ... and he/they will not ... , and he/they will not ... and
The son of Zakiru, son of Il-yada', son of Aššur-šezibanni, the king's servant, who has been doing the king's work,
from ...
... horses trained to the yoke
I will go ...
5 ... s of the king, my lord, have come to me, saying: "The king, my lord, has sent us to you." I have received them and am herewith sending them to the king, my lord.
... in the heart of the enemy, ... , and in the midst of the battle ...
... 4 ... s
a ditto of quinces;
... The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... his ... ,
3 son(s) of Nabû-zeru-lešir;
Mars is a star of the Westland; it is faint and its radiance is like that of the Field star. It is not bright enough to be a star of the Westland; it is faint and its radiance is like that of the Field star. It is faint and its radiance is like that of the Field star.
we shall not ...
9 ditto of the palace herald;
(As for) that house, which had become old, I removed its dilapidated section(s) by the command of the gods Sîn and Nusku. I made its structure larger than the one in the days of the past. I built (and) completed (it) from its foundation(s) to its crenellations. I raised its superstructure. (v 15) I made (it) larger than the one in the days of the past. I built (and) completed (it) from its foundation(s) to its crenellations.
The 'station' is present. The 'path' is curled on the right. The 'strength' is missing...
(As for) Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, (my) hostile brother who had planned murder against Assyria, he (the god Marduk) determined for him a cruel death. He consigned him to a conflagration and burned him alive. He (the god Marduk) determined for him a cruel death like that of a chameleon. He consigned him to a conflagration and burned him alive. He (the god Marduk) determined for him a cruel death like that of a chameleon. He consigned him to a conflag
1 seah of beer for the king's table, 1 seah of beer for the crown prince's table, 1 seah of beer for the magnates, 1 seah of beer for the steward.
... before ...
... 5 ...
Now, I have heard that the son of Zababa-eriba has gone to the son of Zababa-eriba, and that the son of Zababa-eriba has given him a field.
... before ...
The king, my lord, should ask the chief of the public works about the ... of the Inner City. He has removed ... from the ... of the Inner City.
May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
... the town of Sarugi
40 sheep,
(As for) Tammarītu, king of the land Elam, who had spoken insolent word(s) on account of the cutting off of the head of Teumman — which a low-ranking soldier of my army had cut off — and his brothers, his family, (and) the seed of his father’s house, together with eighty-five nobles of the land Elam who march at his side, who had flown away from the weapons of (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar — (vii 15) to praise their great div
let him do ...
4 homers of sesame oil belonging to Bahianu, at the disposal of Aššur-belu-taqqin.
adjoining the house of Lu-balaṭ, ...
In the month of Tebet (X), the city of Aššur, the city of the king, my lord, and the city of the crown prince, my lord, I entered the city of Aššur and took up residence in the palace.
... with Aššur-aplu-...
Indabibi, the king of the land Elam, who had come to the aid of the Babylonians, (and) had marched to the land of Sumer and Akkad, heard about the conquest of his cities and the plundering of his land by the weapons of (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar, the great gods, my lords, who had encouraged me, and (then) he brought the rest of the people of his land into fortresses. He abandoned the city Madaktu, his royal city, and set out for the city
11 minas of silver, capital, belonging to Ša-Nabû-šû, son of Abu-lešir.
He said: "I will not give them anything."
The moon will complete the day in Adar (XII); on the 14th day it will be seen.
1 goose, 1 duck, 10 turtledoves.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nashir-Bel. Good health to the king, my lord!
... , 1 goose, 1 duck,
Nabû-šumu-iškun,
6 wooden ... ,
At that time, the city Kalḫu, which is situated on the bank of the Tigris River, which Aššur-rēša-iši (I), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-rabi (I), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Enlil-nārārī (who was) also vice-regent of the god Aššur, had built, had become old and its walls had buckled. I delineated its area, dug out its
... of the palace manager
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, wise prince, circumspect ruler, shepherd of the people of Assyria, (and) leader of a widespread population, I: I had a palace built anew in the city Tarbiṣu as the residence of Ashurbanipal, the senior son of the king, my lord, and I laid out (its) square.
(As for) the one who alters my inscribed object (and) disrespects my words, may the goddess Ištar, mistress of war, break his weapon (and) may he not stand firm before his enemy. May she hand him over to his enemy and may his enemy take away (his) booty (and) his possessions.
1 1/3 mina ... of the lady Ubru-Nabû;
Ashur-bunaya-usur,
The man who wrote to me: "I will kill you" — that man is dead.
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, then I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, (ii 55) fortified cities, together with the small(er) settlements in their environs (and) the district of the land Bīt-Barrû in its entirety, and
The chariot which goes to the Akitu House and comes back has no driver.
the woman Ahat-abiša, 'third man';
If a fog rolls in in in Nisan (I): the flood will diminish.
son of Aššur-rēša-iši (I), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Mutakkil-Nusku (who was) also king of the universe (and) king of Assyria.
... Ištar of Nineveh ...
Concerning the ... about which the king, our lord, wrote to us,
... the ... of the god Nabû
to ...
the king, my lord, ...
To the 'farmer,' our lord: your servants Adad-šumu-uṣur and Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health to the 'farmer,' our lord!
2 seahs, the regular offering ... ;
From Ašaredu.
Witness Balasî.
The king, my lord, should know (this). Why do you take away the sheep of the people of Calah?
May a later prince restore its weakened (portions). May he restore my inscribed name to its place. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
the words ...
In my accession year (and) in my first regnal year, I marched to the land of the Qumānu, the land of the Uqumanu, the land of the Rāši, the land of the Ḫindaru, the land of the Tumu, the land of the Ša-pī-Bēl, the land of the Zikirtu, the land of the Šubaru, the land of the Uqutti, the land of the Bīt-Zualza, the land of the Bīt-Matti,
... the delegate ...
Witness Adad-aplu-iddina.
... the chariot of the king
... of the oxen ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
(As for) the one who alters my inscribed object (and) disrespects my words, who does evil against me (and) my offspring, may (the god) Aššur, the great lord, glare at him angrily and determine a bad fate for him! May he make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the land and have no pity on him!
... Ilu-pada ...
... I have heard that the king
The king, my lord, should know this. May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
... them ...
In that year, in the month Araḫsamna (VIII), the city wall of Dēr, my lord, ...
in all x persons, servants of these gentlemen —
Now, let the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
have gone out ...
I pursued them on the peaks of the mountains, in the difficult terrain, and (thereby) I exhausted (them). I conquered, plundered, destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire their cities. I carried off as booty at the same time (both) their gods and their people. I turned around (lit. “I turned the front of my yoke”) and returned safely to Assyria.
... upon ...
... with me
in the presence of ...
... the heart of the ...
As to what you wrote to me: "The Urarṭian has written to me: 'The Urarṭian has written to me: '... '"
And as to the work on the ziggurat about which you wrote to me: "It is a great burden on us" — I am now sending you the following order: "You are to do the work on the ziggurat in the month of Shebat (XI)." (But) if it is too much for you, you may do it in the month of Nisan (I).
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nadin-šumi. Good health  to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my  lord!
At that time, the people of the land Bīt-Yakīn, who had not submitted to my yoke, (and) who had not sent their messengers to inquire about my well-being, heard about the conquest of the land of the Qumānu, a dangerous enemy, and fear of my lordly majesty overwhelmed them. They brought their tribute and their audience gift before me and kissed my feet. I received from them hostages, (ii 10') oxen, sheep and goats, donkeys, camels, (and) people. I imposed upon them
To the king, our lord: your servants Nabû-ahhe-eriba and Balasî. Good health to the king, our lord! May Bel and Nabû bless the king, our lord!
