I sent my officials, the governors of the boundary areas of their land, with them and they trampled the people living in those cities, (and) made (them) bow down at their feet. I imposed the tribute (and) payment of my lordship upon them.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
11 Kushite horses from the commander-in-chief;
5 minas, 3 shekels, 1/3 mina less 1/4 shekel: Aššur-immi.
... the 'cavity' ...
what ...
... the lower part is elevated.
... Now then ...
Total, an estate of 10 hectares ...
From the beginning the king, my lord, has been my lord. May the gods of heaven and earth not forsake you!
Witness Barruqu, chariot driver.
The king of the gods, the god Marduk, became angry and plotted evilly to level the land (and) to destroy its people. The river Araḫtu, (normally) a river of abundance, turned into a huge flood like the deluge and swept (its) waters destructively across the city and its dwellings.
2 necklaces ... ;
Witness Urdu-Nabû, scribe.
... I have given 100 sheep to the chariot-horse-trainer(s) and 100 sheep to the ... of the palace.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord! May DNN bless the king, my lord.
... 1 litre 1 'litre' for ... ;
1, the 'coiffured women' of the 'coiffured women' of the city;
Nergal, Laṣ, Išum, Gubaba, Abkuwa, Maliku, Gahal, Nabalê, Nusku: total 10 gods of the house of Belat-ekalli.
4 horses, 2 mules — in the estate of the treasurer.
40 hectares of field in the village of Nabû-šimanni, 10 hectares of field in the village of Nabû-šimanni,
Month Iyyar (II), 10th day, eponym year of Bel-iqbi, governor of Tušhan.
... -šumu-...
Ahu-lamur ...
... the command of the king ...
... -bani, his wife, ... , 1 son, 1 daughter, 3 servants of his, ... ;
I pursued them on the peaks of the mountains and defeated them. I conquered, plundered, destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire their cities.
Nabû, Nergal, Laṣ, Išum:
... of the palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of Assyria.
I received tribute from Qarparunda, the Patinean: silver, gold, tin, bronze, bronze tubs, bronze pails, bronze bowls, bronze linen garments with multi-colored trim, linen garments of the country, oxen, sheep and goats, (and) horses. I received tribute from Qarparunda, the Patinean: silver, gold, tin, bronze, bronze bowls, bronze pails, bronze linen garments with multi-colored trim, oxen, sheep and goats, (and) horses.
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether ... or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or ...
Witness Mannu-ki-Harran, scribe.
... the god Adad released his rains (and) the god Ea opened up his springs. Grain was five cubits high in its furrow (and) ear(s) of corn were five-sixths of a cubits long. Successful harvest(s and) an abundance of grain enabled pasture land to continually flourish, fruit orchards to be very lush with fruit, (and) cattle to successfully give birth to (their) young. During my reign, there was plenitude (and) abundance; during my years, bountiful produce was accumulated.
... to your great divinity
If Jupiter becomes steady in the morning: enemy kings will make peace.
... Iau-ašared
... , a total of 2 persons —
10 shekels of silver belonging to Edu-šallim, at the disposal of Ṣalmu-šarri-iqbi.
Witness Sasî, porter.
... the land of Akkad ... I brought out ... I settled them in the land Hamath. I imposed upon them tribute and payment, (and) considered them as people of Assyria. I ... the city Carchemish ... I brought out ... I settled them in the land Hamath. I imposed upon them tribute and payment, (and) considered them as people of Assyria. I ... the city Carchemish ...
Aššur, who goes to the Akitu House, ...
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
The king, my lord, should send a royal bodyguard to them, so they will do the work and deliver it to the king, my lord. They should also bring the logs to the river bank, so the king, my lord, can inspect them. If they are good, the king, my lord, should send them across (the river).
horses ...
(As for) Gyges, the king of the land Lydia — a remote place that is far away, a place of dry land, a place of thirst, one hundred and forty leagues of desert, thistles, and gazelle-tooth stones — (the god) Aššur, the god who created me, made him see in a dream the mention of my name, saying: “Grasp the feet of Ashurbanipal, king of Assyria, and conquer your enemies through the mention of his name.”
Rīmūt-ilī, the chariot driver of ... , has contracted and bought them from Šamaš-šarru-uṣur for 120 minas of copper.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Witness Šarru-emuranni.
The boats of the Babylonians and the Borsippeans have been launched on the river. The Borsippeans are keeping watch over them, and the Babylonians are crossing over the river with them.
The money is paid completely.
The palace personnel who are bringing the tribute to the king, my lord, are ... ; Aššur-ila'i and I am herewith sending them to the king, my lord.
Why does Nabû-ahhe-eriba keep on writing to the king, my lord, and saying: "I am a servant of the king, my lord, and I am loyal to the king, my lord"? I have now written to the king, my lord, that he may be punished.
I placed Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II), ... , on his (Teumman’s) throne. I installed Tammarītu, his third brother, as king in the city Ḫidalu. (With) the chariots, wagons, horses, mules, harness-broken (steeds), (and) equipment suited for war that I captured between the city Susa and the Ulāya River with the support of (the god) Aššur (and) the goddess Ištar, the great gods, my l
If a planet becomes visible in Shebat (XI): the king will capture a city of his enemy.
Bel-ahu-uṣur, chariot owner;
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Adad-šarru-uṣur or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or his prefect or the mayor of his city or any relative of his, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Remanni-Adad, his sons and his grandsons,
A tablet of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, to the scribe of the king of Elam, my brother. Good health to my brother!
Month of Tebet (X), 26th day, eponym year of Abi-ram.
the camp ...
... and ...
The son of Yakin ...
Ditto by Palil, the city lord of Arbela!
... -šarri
Total 400.
Sîn-ašared, son of Nabû-šumu-iddina, the scribe of the palace, has contracted and bought him from Nabû-šezib for 1/2 mina of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
... and the dead one
The king, my lord, should not ... to the ... of the land of Akkad.
Ubru-apli, ... ;
All these are missing from the regular offerings.
... his servant NN
If a planet rises in Elul (VI): the king will be shut up in his palace.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Aplaya or his sons or his grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Zazî,
Aššur-dān, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Tiglath-pileser (I), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (I) (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of the god Aššur:
I have heard that they are plotting to kill me. I have heard that they are plotting to kill me because of the ... s of Bel-eṭir. I have heard that they are plotting to kill me because of the ... of NN. I have heard that they are plotting to kill me because of the ... of NN.
... his father and his grandfather ...
... the image
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Concerning the ...
Witness Nabû-...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Ribate or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or his prefect or any relative of his, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Aplaya and his sons and his nephews,
all the Babylonians ...
If the earth quakes in Shebat (XI): the land will go to ruin, variant: the land will be dispersed.
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šarru-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! The land of the king my lord is well.
News of the son of Yakin: he is in ...
... the king, my lord ...
If on the 15th day the moon and sun are seen together: a strong enemy will raise his weapons against the land; the enemy will tear down the gate of my city.
Witness Se'-imme.
The king, my lord, should send word that they should be shown a house each in Nineveh, so they can stay there and do their work.
Now, let the king, my lord, send word that they should be shown a house each in Nineveh, and let them live there. May the gods of the king, my lord, make it so that the king, my lord, can see them prosper.
a writing-board ...
Witness Aplu-iddina, ...
who ... to their country ...
Just as a snake and a mongoose do not enter the same hole to lie together together there together, so may you and your women not enter the same room to lie down in the same bed together.
(Property) of Marduk-šāpik-zēri, son of Tiglath-pileser (III), king of Assyria.
among them
Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, king of the kings of (Lower) Egypt, Upper Egypt, (5) Kush, (and) the four quarters, king of the four quarters, the one who has always contested with the enemies of the god Aššur and the great gods, the one who has always achieved victory over (his) enemies, the one who has always contested with the enemies of the god Aššur and the great gods, the
Month Tishri (VII), ... th day, eponym year of Aššur-duru-uṣur.
Ilu-iqbi,
after ...
they are doing work ...
... have been brought in
... the scribe of ...
Now, if the king, my lord, commands, ...
(As for) three of his (Marduk-apla-iddina’s) districts, which had rebelled (and) sided with the land Elam, I conquered those districts. I killed Tandāya, their city ruler, (and) I plundered the land Elam. I brought to Assyria (their) horses, (their) equipment, (and) their implements of war.
... Aššur-mukin-pale'a
The messenger of the king of Elam has come to us, saying: "The king of Assyria has written to me:
I wrote to him as follows: "Why have you not sent me the tribute and the audience gift that I ordered you to send?" He said: "I have sent it to you, but your messenger has not come back."
... in the palace
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 6th day, eponym year of Balaṭu, governor of Arzuhina.
The Tebilti River, a tempestuous flood (of water) which had flowed from distant days by the side of the palace and which had shaken its base when its flood was in full spate:
Witness Nabû-dur-beli.
To Sîn-aḫu-uṣur:
These are the ones placed under the ...
... the captives whom I sent to the king, my lord
The king, my lord, should send a bodyguard to the Inner City, and the king, my lord, should give orders to the Inner City: they should bring the bulls and sheep to me. I will bring the bulls and sheep to the king, my lord, and give them to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should give orders to the Inner City: they should bring the bulls and sheep to me.
of the people of my country ...
The money is paid completely. That ... is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The king, my lord, should send a bodyguard to them, so they will come and bring the stone thresholds. The king should send word that they should be shown a house in Nineveh, so they can stay there and work on the stone thresholds.
... they have been sold
If there is a 'weapon'-mark in the 'yoke' of the lung which rises from right to left: my army will take the enemy's booty.
I have heard that the king of Elam has sent 25,000 archers to the commander-in-chief, and that the king of Babylon has sent 20,000 archers to the governor of Bit-Amukani. The king of Elam has also sent 20,000 archers to the governor of Bit-Imbî. The king of Babylon has also sent 20,000 archers to the governor of Bit-Amukani. The king of Elam has also sent 20,000
Witness Tabalayu.
The king, my lord, should ask the chief of public works about it.
NN, gate-guard;
The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
Concerning the ... about which Aššur-... wrote to me, I have sent ... to them ...
Šumâ, son of Aplaya, of the house of their lords;
... Witness Bel-upahhir.
I carried off the people of the land Bīt-Yakīn, together with their possessions, (and) brought (them) to Assyria. I reorganized that land (and) imposed one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the gods of Assyria, my lords. I installed a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over them. I imposed the yoke of my lordship upon them.
Witness Mannu-...
The ... of Aššur-šumu-iddina, the ... of Aššur-šumu-iddina, the ... of Aššur-šumu-iddina, the ... of Aššur-šumu-iddina, the ... of Aššur-šumu-iddina, the ... of Aššur-šumu-iddina, the ... of Aššur-šumu-iddina, the ... of Aššur-šumu-iddina, the ... of Aššur-
To the king, my lord: your servant, Nabû-šumu-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord. May Aššur, Sin, Šamaš, Bel, Nabû, Nergal, Ištar of Nineveh and Ištar of Arbela call vigour, health, happiness, physical well-being and lasting days for the king, my lord.
Afterwards, Uallî, his son, sat on his throne. He saw the might of the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Šarrat-Kidmuri, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Nergal, (and) Nusku, the great gods, my lords, and bowed down to my yoke. For the preservation of his (own) life, he opened up his hands to me (and) made an
The priest of Ištar of Arbela ...
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 9th day, eponym year of La-baši, chief of trade (657 B.C.).
2 cuts of shoulder. Of 12 oxen: the stomachs,
(As for) the Cimmerians, a dangerous enemy who had never feared my ancestors, and, with regard to me, had not grasped the feet of my royal majesty, with the support of the gods Aššur, Bēl (Marduk), and Nabû, the great gods, my lords, who had encouraged me through auspicious omens, dream(s), egirrû-oracle(s), (and) message(s) from ecstatics, (ix 10') I brought about their defeat inside (the city) Tīl-T
The king, my lord, should send (word) that they should be shown a house in Nineveh, and let them stay there.
We shall go and speak with the scribe.
If the king, my lord, commands, I will write to the king, my lord, about it.
Seal of NN,
I had a canopy, which rivals the heavens, made from musukkannu-wood, a durable wood. I clad its perimeter with thirty-four talents (and) twenty minas of reddish gold and (thereby) reinforced its bonds. I stretched out its covering over the god Marduk, my lord, and (thus) secured its roof.
Nabû-šarru-uṣur, governor of Nineveh;
... the temple of Nabû ...
their sons ...
8 homers 4 seahs.
I have heard that the king of Elam has written to his son, saying: "Go and do your work in Assyria."
... minas of silver
... to the city of Akkad
Witness NN.
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), offspring of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, descendant of Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria —
As to the news of the king of Elam, the messengers whom I sent to him have come back and told me the following:
... these
I am herewith sending to the king, my lord, the captives who were brought to me from the town of the chief cupbearer. The king, my lord, should question them.
If the moon at its appearance wears a crown: the king will reach the highest rank. — It will be seen on the 1st day.
The king, my lord, knows that the Arameans are ... ; they are not loyal people. They are ... ; they are not loyal people. They are ... ; they are not loyal people. They are ... ; they are not loyal people. They are ... ; they are not loyal people. They are ... ; they are not loyal people. They are ... ; they are not loyal people. They are ... ; they are not loyal people. They are ... ; they are not loyal people.
In the charge of Ahu-iddina, commander-of-fifty.
... the people
Good health to the king, my lord!
The Pleiades are (equivalent to) Venus; the Pleiades are Mars.
... the presence of the god
Witness Kannunayu.
24 shekels of silver belonging to the harem manageress of the central city, at the disposal of Girittu.
As to the news of the Elamite, I have heard that he has been defeated on his expedition against the Cimmerians. His army has been scattered, and he himself has been captured. They have taken him to Bit-Bunakki, and he is there now. The messengers of the king, my lord, have gone to see him, and he has spoken with them, saying: "The king of Assyria has sent me to Bit-Bunakki."
(As for) Ummanaldašu (Ḫumban-ḫaltaš III), the king of the land Elam, who had heard about the might of my weapons that had prevailed over the land Elam and (as for) Tammarītu, the king of the land Elam who had fled to me (and) grasped my feet, I brought them inside Baltil (Aššur) and the city Ḫarrān and (then) I made them take an oath by the great gods. I clothed Tammarītu in garment
Witness Marduk-šarru-uṣur, cohort commander.
1 house, 2 gardens ... ;
2 tureens of bouillon;
adjoining the town of Bit-Dannaya,
Adad-ibni ...
3, Assyrian, scribes of the chief eunuch;
Month ... , 19th day, eponym year of Marduk-šarru-uṣur.
Nabû-balliṭ, ... ; NN, chariot driver;
Aššur-natkil,
The lord of kings should know (this).
At that time, in the reign of a previous king, bad omens occurred.
... the goddess Ištar
The base of the middle 'finger' of the lung is 'bound.'
The people of the land of Akkad are very weak. The king, my lord, should send word that they be allowed to go out and graze in the steppe. They should also be allowed to go out to the open country and collect wood.
10 ... ;
What is it that the king, my lord, commands?
Nabû-šumu-iddina ...
... me, the Chaldean ...
The king's word to the commander-in-chief:
The king, my lord, should send word that they should be shown a house in Nineveh.
I built (and) completed that palace from its foundations to its battlements. I roofed it with magnificent cedar beams. I fastened bands of silver on doors of cypress (and) white cedar and I installed (them) in its gates.
Witness Nabû'a.
Witness Šep-...
Witness NN. Witness Habil-ken.
adjoining a street,
... in the presence of Nabû-nadin-ahi
1, of the chief confectioner; 1, of the chief cook.
Adad-le'i, prefect;
there ...
Witness ... -ili, ...
A tablet of Šamaš-šumu-ukin to Nabû-duru-uṣur. Good health to my brother!
I have written to you; do not be negligent.
Concerning the king's subjects who are in the city of Kar-Aššur, about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let them be brought here!" — I have sent word, and they are on their way. The messenger of the Palace Superintendent ...
the goddess Ištar of ...
Because of the ... of the ... of the land of ... , which ... , I sent ... to you.
Performed in the presence of Bel-... -iqbi.
... the son of ... you
I marched to the land Ḫatti. I conquered the city Arzâ, the royal city of Aramu, the Urarṭian. I brought out of it people, oxen, and sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty. I conquered the city Ḫubuškia, the royal city of Samanuḫa, the Sapardean. I brought out of it people, oxen, and sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty. I conquered the city Arqâ
(As for) Nabû-šuma-ēreš, the šandabakku (governor of Nippur), who did not honor (my) treaty, he suffered from dropsy, (that is) “full water.”
... of Inurta-...
100 ... horses,
... Bel-eṭir, the scribe of the crown prince, and the eunuchs of the crown prince, my lord, ...
Witness Marduk-šakin-šumi, royal bodyguard.
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
I have given the order to release the boats, but they are not complying. They are  transporting the barley and the straw in their boats.
The priest of Aššur circumambulated the House. The chanters went out and came in (again).
... very
I will go and ...
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
May Marduk and Zarpanitu bless the king, my lord!
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether these men or their sons or their grandsons or their brothers or their nephews or their prefect or any relative of theirs, seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Aššur-belu-taqqin,
... Ubrî
11th day.
and his people, ... ,
News of the Urarṭian: ... the son of ... the prefect of the Manneans ... the prefect of the ... has gone to the city ... in the land of Mannea.
He shall pay in Nisan (I).
As to what you wrote: "I have sent my messenger to you, but he has not come back" — send him back quickly! Do not detain him, but send him quickly! If he comes back quickly, I will be here in no time. If not, I will come as soon as he comes back. I am waiting for him right now. As soon as he comes back, I shall write to you in detail.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
At that time, in the reign of a previous king, bad omens occurred in Sumer and Akkad. The king, my lord, should know (this).
to ... the king, my lord
Witness ... a, son of Bel-duri.
Venus became visible in the west.
a cup of quinces;
If the earth quakes all day: dispersal of the land; the land will go to ruin.
I have heard that the son of NN has said to the son of NN: "The king of Assyria is marching against us." The son of NN is a servant of the king of Assyria; he has come to greet the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should ask him: "Why did you come?"
... the seed of Aššur ...
... their ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health  to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
1 ditto of (mixed) kernels. A cup of hammurtu-beer;
A thigh, a shoulder, outer cuts;
Concerning the news of the king of Elam, I have heard it. He has gone out of the city Bīt-Imbî and entered the city Susa. The king, my lord, should know (this).
... the ... s of the king, my lord
Tiglath-pileser, valiant man, conqueror of the insubmissive, who breaks up the forces of the rebellious:
to ...
(As for) Bēl-šarrāni, son of Bunnannū, a Gambulian whose residence is located twelve leagues distance in water and swamps, by the command of the god Aššur, my lord, fear of the kingship of Assyria overwhelmed him and he brought to Nineveh, my capital city, his daughter, together with a substantial dowry, to serve as a housekeeper.
Witness Saka-kutu.
... the governor of Harran
The king, my lord, should know (this).
a 2-seah jar of hinhinu-seeds;
... the tents in the house ...
... -le'i
I said: "... you will go ...
from his sons ...
... to the end of the day
Ashur-belu-usur,
... the king should know ...
of the forts ...
The palace of Shalmaneser, great king, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria: facing (brick) of the well of the temple of the divine Kidmuru.
... the king, my lord
... the town of Arbiteh
to the man of ...
... of the boatmen ...
... the front red, of the country;
If Jupiter enters the moon: the king of Akkad will die, but the king of the Westland will become strong and will have no rival; the king of Subartu will become strong and will have no rival; the king of Akkad will be weak, but the king of the Westland will become strong and will have no rival.
seed corn ...
... I wrote to the king, my lord, and said: "The king of Assyria is marching against us." The king, my lord, should know (this).
The king, your father, ...
— On the 14th day the moon is seen together with the sun.
of NN, the chariot driver(s)
For the goddess Ištar, his lady: Sargon (II), appointee of the god Enlil, nešakku-priest of the god Aššur, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, built (and) completed the temple of the goddess Ištar, his lady, in the city Arbela.
until you ...
We have written to the king, our lord, (about) the matter which we heard in the city of Assur. The king should know (this). The palace should be on the alert.
5 (items): a stand, a potstand, a folding screen, a chair, and a cupbearer’s (pot)stand (made) of elephant ivory, ebony, (and) boxwood, whose mountings are of gold and silver;
May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
May Bel and Nabû bless the king, my lord!
The king should not say: "He is a servant of the king; he should come." He is a citizen of Babylon; he has come to greet the king, my lord. He is not a servant of the king; he is a citizen of Babylon.
Total: 1,112 — (governor of) Manṣuate.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
... to the guard ...
2 ditto, exempt;
NN, ...
Now, concerning the horses of the Elamites about which you wrote, write to them as follows:
... his people
... to greet
Seal of ... -bel, owner of the ... s being sold.
Nabû-eriba, servant of Ša-Nabû-šû —
of the prefects ...
Witness ... -ilu.
The house of the Assyrian Ištar is well. The temple of the Assyrian Ištar is well. The land of Assyria is well. May the king, my lord, be happy indeed!
... to the king, my lord ... I have sent ... to the king, my lord.
On the 10th of Nisan (I) the king's bodyguard, the prefect of Arrapha, and the prefect of Calah went to the town of Ṣabat-šarri.
Witness Nabû-da''inanni, ditto.
Witness Mannu-lu-šulmu.
I had a palace of breccia, alabaster, elephant ivory, ebony, boxwood, musukkannu-wood, cedar, cypress, juniper, and elammaku-wood, (a palace that I named) Egalzagdinutukua (“The Palace Without a Rival”), constructed thereon as my royal residence.
in ...
... the chariot
The palace of Amēl-Marduk, great king, son of Nebuchadnezzar (II), great king, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also great king.
Month of Sivan (III), 1st day, eponym year of Šulmu-beli-lašme.
Aššur-bēl-kala, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (I), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also vice-regent of the god Aššur:
... I made him swear by the great gods of heaven and netherworld, and (then) I made him take an oath and put a curse which cannot be dispelled in his mouth. I made him swear by the great gods of heaven and netherworld, and (then) I made him take an oath and put a curse which cannot be dispelled in his mouth. I made him swear by the great gods of heaven and netherworld, and (then) I made him take an oath and put a curse which cannot be dispelled in his mouth. I made him swear by the great gods of heaven
The king, my lord, should know (this)...
The silver shall increase by a third. He shall pay it in its original amount in the month of Tishri (VII). If he does not pay, it shall increase by a fourth. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
... I planted alongside it (the palace) a botanical garden, a replica of Mount Amanus, which has all kinds of aromatic plants (and) fruit trees.
the exorcist ...
... field of Ribate, in the town of ...
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed. The judge shall not heed his case.
... day ...
2 'litres' of midru-bread; 2 'litres' of spiced bread.
... the king, my lord, said
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
Jupiter became visible in the east; its interpretation:
(Property) of Šarru-nādin-aḫi, son of Marduk-ibni.
On my eighth campaign, I marched against Dunānu, son of Bēl-iqīša, to the land Gambulu, which had put its trust in the king of the land Elam (vii 10) (and) had not bowed down to my yoke. With my mighty battle array, I covered the land Gambulu in its entirety like a fog. I conquered the city Ša-pī-Bēl, his fortified city, whose location is situated between rivers.
As to the cavalry about which the king, my lord, wrote to me:
An estate of x hectares of land adjoining the road that leads from ... to the house of Nabû-... , and the house of Nabû-... ;
as the king, my lord, ...
Nabû-ahu-ereš, servant of NN —
... s
Witness Issar-šumu-iddina, scribe.
Ditto, may they (the gods) make you like a fly in the hand of your enemy, and may your enemy squash you. May your enemy take away your property, your possessions, and your wife.
The lord of kings, my lord, can be glad indeed. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Ditto by Ištar of Nineveh and Ištar of Arbela!
The heart of the ram is normal...
... the hand of Bel-ibni
Witness Gir-...
I sent a letter to the Palace through Šarru-lu-dari. The letter came to me on the 1st of Nisan (I). I am herewith sending it to the Palace.
... the temple of Ea ...
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether these men or their sons or their grandsons or their brothers or their nephews or their prefect or their cohort commander or their labour-duty superior or their prefect or their neighbour or their relative or their  neighbour's neighbour or their relative's neighbour or their labour-duty superior or their prefect or their neighbour's prefect or their neighbour's neighbour's prefect or their neighbour's neighbour's neighbour's prefect or their neighbour's neighbour's neighbour's prefect or their neighbour's
Witness Na'di-ilu.
The people of the land Ḫatti, who had rebelled against the god Aššur and the goddess Ištar, my lords, and had not bowed down to my yoke, ... I brought about their defeat. I destroyed their settlements, leveling (them) down to the ground. I set fire to pavilion(s and) tents, their abodes, and reduced (them) to ashes. I captured alive Adad-nārārī (II), their king, (and) brought (him) before me. I seized
... the woman ...
The charge of the rear palace is well.
... of the temple of ...
Witness Remut-ili.
The priest of Adad wears a golden tiara.
... the Assyrian ... in the fort
they go ...
The king, my lord, can be glad indeed about the work on the fort.
... king of the world, king of Assyria, ... , the one who fashioned image(s) of the deities Aššur, Mullissu, ... , the one who performs the rites of Ešarra, ... , the one who carries out to perfection the forgotten rites of the great gods, ... , the one who makes sattukku-offerings abundant, ... , the one who provides for Ekur, ... , the one who makes great the cult centers of the gods, ... , the one who performs the rites of the great gods, ... , the one
... I have written to him, saying: "... the chief cupbearer ... "
... his sons
Nabû-shezibanni,
... to the presence of the king ...
Total, of Ṭab-ahhe, son of Se'-na'id.
to ...
The king, my lord, should send word that they should be shown a house in Nineveh, and they should live there. The king should not send them to me, because I am not able to give them a house.
Urad-Nabû, the son of Bel-eṭir, servant of Šamšī-Adad.
If a planet rises in the path of the Anu stars: the king of the land will die, and his land will diminish.
Witness Šar-Issar, ...
1 hand-ring of gold, 1/4 shekel in weight; 1 arm-ring, 1/3 shekel in weight; 1/4 (of a mina) of gold in the form of a band, for the arm-ring;
By the command of the god Marduk, the great lord, and the goddess Zarpanītu, the queen, may the days of my reign be long (and) may my years be many.
At that time, the temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, my mistress, which Aššur-dān (I), son of Tiglath-pileser (I), my forefather, had previously built — that temple had become dilapidated and I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I rebuilt (it) from top to bottom and deposited my monumental inscription.
owner of the ... being sold.
Witness NN, cohort commander.
In the corridors that are within the papāḫu-chambers, I made openings for latticed windows. At their gates, I stationed apotropaic figures of alabaster (and) elephant ivory, whose hands are folded, (and) who are filled with pride (and) exuberance.
... our ...
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why have you not sent me any news of the Manneans since the time of your brother?" — now then I am sending to the king, my lord, the messenger of the son of Aššur-naṣir, the son of the king of the land Tabal, who came to me. He has brought me the following news of the Manneans: "The king of the land Mannea has died; his son, who was not named for kingship, has ascended the throne. He is a son of a nobody
The men of the Palace Herald and the Chief Confectioner have come and are doing the work.
Does your great divinity know it? Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
1, the Itu'eans, the palace personnel,
... his ...
The tribute of the land of the Lullumu, the land of the Uqumanu, and the land of the Papḫu.
... ni,
The coils of the colon are ... in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
a flagon of beer of bruised grain.
... the Lady of Nineveh
Witness Šarru-emuranni, chief cook.
... I built (and) completed ... from its foundations to its crenellations... I roofed them with long beams of cedar... I fastened bands of silver on doors of white cedar (and) I installed (them) in their gates. I had ... made of silver and gold and I set (them) up in their doorways. I had ... made of silver and gold and I set (them) up in their gateways.
... the men who were taken away
From Ašaredu the younger, son of the king.
... his name in his mouth
Witness Adad-šumu-iškun, ...
Total, the temple steward.
... to ...
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... 34 ditto ditto ditto,
they are bringing in ...
Total, Aššur-matu-taqqin, village manager.
a total of 150 Kushite horses and 300 cavalry mounts —
... they are plotting
... I have sent ... to the king, my lord; let the king, my lord, ask him what he has to say.
... he plundered and ... of his land, together with his wife, his sons, and his daughters, ...
... the Hubuškian
From Issar-šumu-ereš.
I have given ...
... his servants, who had fled
... ;
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nadin-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord! The forts and the servants of the king, my lord, are well.
On my return march, I defeated all together the Tuʾumuna, Riḫiḫu, Yadaqqu, Ubudu, Gibrê, Maliḫu (Malaḫu), Gurumu, Ubulu, Damunu, Gambulu, Ḫindaru, Ruʾuʾa, Puqudu, Ḫamrānu, Ḫagarānu, Nabatu, (and) Liʾtaʾu, insubmissive Arameans.
of the king ...
Witness Adad-naṣir, ...
The money is paid completely.
... the king, my lord
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
Witness Nabû-...
... there is
The king's word to NN: I am well; you can be glad.
3 bags of sesame;
Witness Isanayu.
... to Marduk-aplu-iddina
NN and his people, ... ,
(As for) the commandants (and) the prefects of the city Ekron who had thrown Padî, their king who was bound by treaty and oaths to Assyria, into iron fetters and who had handed him over to Hezekiah of the land Judah in a hostile manner, they became frightened on account of the villainous acts they had committed. They formed a confederation with the kings of Egypt (and) the archers, chariots, (and) horses of the king of the land Meluḫḫa, forces without number, and they came to their
... the rear ...
The land of the king of Elam ... which he/they ... , and the ... of the land of the king of Elam ...
... the temple of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, ... I built (and) completed. I decorated (it) with silver (and) gold, (and) filled (it) with splendor. I placed inside it the gods and goddesses of the lands that I had conquered.
Bel-duri,
To the god Marduk, his lord: Nabopolassar, king of Babylon, presented (this object) for the sake of his life.
... Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it? Does your great divinity know it?
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
On my eighth campaign, I marched against Dunānu, son of Bēl-iqīša, to the land Gambulu, which had put its trust in the king of the land Elam (vii 10) (and) had not bowed down to my yoke. With my mighty battle array, I covered the land Gambulu in its entirety like a fog. I conquered the city Ša-pī-Bēl, his fortified city, whose location is situated between rivers.
Witness NN, scribe.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
... the chariot ...
The city Kalḫu I took in hand for renovation. I dug a canal from the Upper Zab (and) called it Patti-ḫegalli. I had a palace of limestone, pendû-stone, breccia, alabaster, elephant ivory, ebony, boxwood, musukkannu-wood, cedar, cypress, juniper, elammaku-wood, (and) Indian wood, (vi 15) (a palace that I named) Egalzagdinutukua (“The Palace Without a Rival”
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: reliable speech; the land will become happy.
When in the presence of the king, my lord, ...
Dayan-Inurta,
And now ... is coming to the Palace.
Witness Riba-ahhe.
Month Iyyar (II), eponym year of Šulmu-beli-lašme, the eunuch.
of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, ...
Disregard what happens after my stipulated term...
From Balasî.
... he has sent ... to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should question them.
He said: "I have heard that you are afraid of the punishment of the god ... ; do not be afraid! The punishment of the god ... is ... "
Perhaps my lord will say: "Why did you not write to me?" I have now written to my lord ...
May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May they give you long days and everlasting years!
Zer-Issar, son of Ahû'a, his brother ...
... , ... , ...
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria: property of the temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh.
... from the presence ...
in all x persons, servants of NN, the cohort commander —
Witness Šumma-Adad. Witness Ahu-nuri.
NN, son of Haza-ila'i, has contracted and bought them from these gentlemen for x minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
I have heard that the king of Elam has mobilized his troops and is coming to Bit-Bunakki. I have heard that the governor of Arrapha has mobilized his troops and is going to meet the king of Elam. I have heard that the governor of Calah has mobilized his troops and is going to meet the king of Elam.
Palace of Shalmaneser, son of Adad-nārārī (I), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur: ...
Witness Šep-Issar, servant of the governor of Calah.
... who/which ... the land Bīt-Ḫumria (Israel) ... I brought out and ... I placed (them) under the authority of the god Marduk, my lord. I ... the land Bīt-Ḫumria (Israel) ... I imposed upon them tribute and payment greater than before.
to them ...
I received gold (and) shining silver sling straps as their wrist-trappings (and) slashed off their belts with sharp swords. I took away gold (and) silver (decorated) belt-daggers as their waist-trappings.
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, chariot driver.
... the heart is very good
The coils of the colon are 16 in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
... the hand of their lord
The chariot of the king of Babylon, which had been stationed in the city of Akkad, had been loaded with ... and was in readiness to go. The messenger of the king of Babylon, who had come to the city of Akkad, saw the chariot of the king of Babylon and the troops of the king of Elam, and he said to the messenger of the king of Babylon: "The troops of the king of Elam are ... "
... the 'station' ...
The 'station' is present. The 'path' ... The left of the gall bladder is split...
a cup of quinces;
10 talents 17 minas of ...
— Jupiter stood there.
... Basunu and his people, ... ,
The palace of Adad-nārārī, king of the universe, son of Arik-dīn-ili, king of Assyria: (brick) belonging to the forecourt of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh.
... , son of 3 spans' height; ... ;
3 ...
I sent a letter to the Palace. Now Nabû-šumu-iddina, the scribe, has come to me, saying: "The king has written to me: 'Send me a copy of the letter that you sent to the Palace.'"
The 'strength' is present.
I joyfully entered his palace, which is in Babylon, then I opened his treasury and brought out gold, silver, gold (and) silver utensils, precious stones, all kinds of possessions (and) property without number, a substantial tribute, (together with) his palace women, courtiers, attendants, male singers, female singers, all of the craftsmen, as many as there were, (and) his palace attendants, and I counted (them) as booty.
of the palace supervisor of the ... eans.
The corn taxes of these fields and orchards shall not be collected,
And now, when I have come, I have seen the house of my lord and the house of my lord's son.
I am herewith sending to the king, my lord, the letter which I sent to the Palace. I have written to the Palace about the news of the Urarṭian, and about the news of the Cimmerians.
I have sent ...
(As for) Mugallu, the Melidean, who had not bowed down to the kings, my ancestors, and had not pulled their yoke, he brought to Nineveh (his) daughter, together with a substantial dowry, to serve as a housekeeper, and he kissed my feet. I imposed upon Mugallu an annual payment of large horses. Later, he sinned against my treaty, did not respect my kindness, and cast off the yoke of my lordship. He withheld his annual payment and did not send (it) to me.
After Yakīn-Lû, the king of the land Arwad, had gone to (his) fate, Azi-Baʾal, Abī-Baʾal, (and) Adūnī-Baʾal, the sons of Yakīn-Lû who reside in the middle of the sea, came up from the middle of the sea, came with their substantial audience gift(s), and kissed my feet. I looked upon Azi-Baʾal with pleasure and installed him as king of the land Arwad.
Witness Hur-waṣi.
My men who are in the service of the king, my lord, have been sold for silver.
... to the king ...
... they will do
I settled them in the cities Ḫarrua (and) Ušnanis, fortified cities, and I placed them under the authority of a eunuch of mine, the governor of the city Arrapḫa. I had a stele made, had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over them written on it, and I erected (it) in (that) city.
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
a basket of (mixed) fruit.
Zizî;
... I have written
An estate of 1 hectare of land adjoining Mannu-ki-Arbail;
from the 21st day of this month ...
... I sent ... to him, saying: "... your ... s and your ... s, and send me your servants who ... to me!" He did not send (any) of his servants.
... because of ...
... his ... to the land
... to ...
If Venus disappears in Ab (V) from the 1st to the 30th day: there will be rains and floods.
of days ...
NN, the eunuch whom Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, sent to Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the rab mūgi, concerning the matter about which the king, my lord, wrote to me, has come to me. I have questioned him, and he told me as follows: "The king, my lord, wrote to me: 'Send Nabû-šarru-uṣur to me whatever news of the son of Yakin he has heard.'
... the forts and the servants
To the king, my lord: your servant Gabbu-ana-Aššur.
Land of the Palace Herald
the army of ...
Witness ... ayu.
... Aššur-šumu-ka''in
1 seah 1 'litre' of regular offering loaves;
... the god Aššur concerning the offerings of his father's house.
Nabû-remanni, his wife and two sons, a total of 4;
an estate of 1 hectare 1 decare adjoining the house of Gagî;
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Month Iyyar (II), 5th day, eponym year of Abi-yaqar.
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
A second time to the temple of the goddess Ištar.
Witness Nabû-zeru-lešir.
To the king, my lord: your servant Mannu-ki-Ninua. Good health to the king, my lord! The land of the king my lord is well.
I have heard that the Itu'eans have been incited to rebel against you. I have heard that they are saying: "We shall not obey the king's command; we shall not give the tribute."
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, (or) changed or altered the proceedings...
... the Itu'eans
Let them be taken out and put aside!
20 cows of his own;
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: reliable speech; the land will become happy.
... Aššur, my lord, ... the land of Assyria ... I mustered my chariotry (and) troops. I marched to the land of the Lullumu. I conquered the land of the Lullumu. I brought their booty, possessions, (and) property to my city Aššur.
Or will someone else cause him to plot it, and will the king, my lord, listen to him?
I have written to you; do not be negligent. Write me quickly!
When the king, my lord, sent me to the land of Akkad, I went and stayed two days in Bit-Amukani. The king, my lord, sent me to the land of Akkad, saying: "Go and stay two days in Bit-Amukani!"
I have not heard any news about the king of Elam since the time the king, my lord, went to the land of the Manneans. The king, my lord, should ask the messenger who went to the land of the Manneans whether the king of Elam is alive.
... the king's bodyguard ...
The king, my lord, knows that I am a poor man, that I have no field, that I have no house, that I have no servants, that I am a dead dog, that I have no water, that I have no oil, that I have no lamp.
From Nergal-apil-kumu'a.
I sent a letter to the Palace scribe, saying: "Let them give me the order to go and bring the logs across (the river)." He did not give me the order, but said: "I will write to the Palace."
... of the 'hand' of God
... minas ...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the 25th day of this month, the month ... of this year, to the 24th day of the month ... of this year, for 30 days and nights, the stipulated term —
... you
owner of the vineyard being sold.
He said: "Aššur-iddina ...
1 bow, ... ;
The king, my lord, should send word that they should bring the horses to me. I will then bring them to the king, my lord.
Witness Issar-bani-zeri.
If a meteor flashes from the east and sets in the west: the main army of the enemy will fall.
Moreover, I struck with the sword Teušpa, a Cimmerian, a barbarian whose home is remote, together with his entire army, in the territory of the land Ḫubušna, which is (located) behind Mount Nipur. I reorganized that land (and) imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the gods of Assyria, my lords.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
... the people of Assyria ...
The palace of Tiglath-pileser, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (I), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Mutakkil-Nusku (who was) also king of the universe (and) king of Assyria: (brick) belonging to the facing of (the quay wall) of the River Ḫusir.
I built (and) completed (it) from its foundations to its crenellations. I roofed it with magnificent cedar beams. I fastened bands of silver on doors of cypress (and) white cedar and I installed (them) in its gates.
The middle of the 'station' is effaced.
... ;
... Sargon (II)
... Ahu-duri
... the gall bladder is flattened...
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Bīt-Daganna, Joppa, Banayabarqa, (and) Azuru, the cities of Ṣidqâ that had not submitted to me quickly. I approached the city Ekron and I killed the governors (and) nobles who had committed crime(s) and hung their corpses on towers around the city; I counted the citizens who had committed the criminal acts as booty; (and) I commanded that the rest of them, (those) who were not guilty of crimes or wrongdo
Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, has contracted and bought him from Bel-Harran-isse'a for 1 1/2 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
I have sent ... ; they are bringing it to the Palace.
I am the king who provides for you.
2 sheep, kirrutu-meal;
Witness ... -abu-uṣur, overseer of the royal crypts.
Month Elul (VI), 13th day.
The messengers of the king of Elam have come to us, saying: "The king of Elam is well; he has gone to the city of Bīt-Bunaki."
And as to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "The son of Yakin has written to me: 'The king of Elam has sent me a message'" —
I marched against the land Katmuḫu. I conquered the city Šarru-iqbi, the city of the king of the land Katmuḫu. I brought out of it people, oxen, (and) sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty. I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire the city. I conquered the city Ḫarḫar, the city of the king of the land Katmuḫu. I brought out of it people, oxen, (and) sheep and goats, and I counted (
To the king, my lord: your servant, Bel-iddina. May Aššur, Sin, Šamaš, Bel, Zarpanitu, Nabû, Tašmetu, Ištar of Nineveh, and Ištar of Arbela — these great gods who love your kingship — allow the king, my lord, to live 100 years.
I have heard that ... is plotting to kill me. I have heard that ... is plotting to kill me. I have heard that ... is plotting to kill me. I have heard that the Itu'eans are plotting to kill me.
In the month of ... , the 2nd day, I went to the river bank with NN and the people of the town of ... I inspected the boats and 300 (homers of) barley were loaded on them.
... have been brought in
Silver, gold, precious stones, possessions, property, herds (and) flocks, (vi 15) which the people of Cilicia had taken away (and) appropriated for themselves during the time of the kings, my ancestors, I conquered those settlements. I tore the land apart from within. I carried off silver, gold, precious stones, possessions, property, herds (and) flocks, (vi 20) (and) goods without number and brought (them) to my city Aššur. I deposited (them) for ever after
The money is paid completely. Those fields, houses, gardens, and people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
As to the merchants about whom my lord wrote to me, I have written to them, and they have come. I have given them 20 minas of silver and 10 minas of gold.
... 1/2 'litre';
The 'well-being' is present. The left of the gall bladder is attached. The base of the middle part is 'loose.'
Witness NN, citizen of Babylon. Witness NN, ...
Bel-dan,
... you have sent ...
... to you ...
He brought before me (his) daughter, his own offspring, and the daughters of his brothers to serve as housekeepers. He brought his son, who had never crossed the sea, to do obeisance to me. I received from him his daughter and the daughters of his brothers, together with a large marriage gift. I had mercy on him and (then) I gave (his) son, his offspring, back to him.
From Ašaredu the older.
... the king, my lord, ...
I have sent my scouts to ... ; they are bringing back ... , and I am herewith sending them to the king, my lord.
... the woman Yabibê and her brother ...
Witness NN.
... the deputy
At that time, the palace in the citadel of Nineveh, which earlier kings, my ancestors, had had constructed for their lordly dwelling, but whose construction they had carried out inexpertly — the Tebilti River, a tempestuous flood (of water) which when it rose had destroyed sacred buildings inside the city and exposed the mounds of their tombs (lit. “their mounded tombs”) to the sun, and which had flowed from distant days by the side of the palace and which (thereby) had caused erosion in its foundation when its flood was
... the tablets ...
adjoining the field of Šulmu-beli, ...
... ;
An estate of ... adjoining ...
Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, king of kings, lord of lords, ruler of rulers, prince, lord of all, conqueror of the rebellious — those who do not submit to him (and) who are hostile to the god Aššur—, defeater of the princes of the Qutu as far as the land Meḫru, disperser of the forces of the land of the Šubaru and the remote lands Nairi as far as the border of Makan, strong king, capable
To the king, my lord: your servant Bel-le'i. Good health to the king, my lord!
sheep ...
... , the god ... , the goddess Ištar of Uruk, the god Sîn, the god Šamaš, the god Adad, the goddess Šala, the god Nabû, the goddess Tašmētu, the god Nergal, the goddess Laṣ, the Sebitti, the gods of the night:
To Aššur-nādin-aḫi, king of Assyria:
Witness Šulmu-šarri.
1 bag of sesame; 6 ditto of (mixed) kernels.
5,000 (homers) of seed corn ...
Witness Tuqunu-ereš, merchant.
I marched against Urtaku, the king of the land Elam who had not bowed down to my yoke. I conquered the city Bīt-Imbî, his fortified city, whose location is situated between rivers. I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the city Bīt-Imbî. I brought out of it people, young (and) old, horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty. (ii 15) I destroyed, devastated, (and
Witness Banî, deputy of the chief physician.
(Guaranteed against) seizures of epilepsy for 100 days (and against) fraud forever.
Witness Ubru-Nabû, son of Nabû-nadin-ahi.
... you
we ...
Witness Zarutî, chariot driver of the prince.
has given ...
... whether
20 minas, NN, merchant ... ;
The breast-bone is thick. The heart of the ram is normal...
... the goddess Ištar
100, 1,200, or 1,300 sheep, of the shepherds of the Itu'eans;
a ditto of olives; a basket of (mixed) fruit.
... I have written
... I have written to my lord.
... 5, the temple scribe
... of oxen
Total 2: the land of the Uqutu.
... to the king ...
... my land
I have written ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... the town of Adad-šarru-uṣur, near the city of Šabirešu.
... the palace in the city of Dur-Šarruken
... s of Elam ...
... the sons of Ukku and NN
The son of Nabû-zēr-kitti-līšir, son of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), descendant of Yakīn,
I had a stele made, had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, written on it, and I erected (it) in (that) city.
... &  beer  &  Nabû-ahhe-balliṭ
Moreover, breccia, as much as is needed (for making) burzigallu-bowls, (a stone) that had never been seen before, (vi 10) revealed itself at Kapridargilâ (“Dargilâ Village”), which is on the border of the city Tīl-Barsip.
This was the report of the priest of the ziggurrat.
Witness Nanî, ditto of Nabû.
As to the news of the son of Yakin: he is in Babylon. He has not gone out of the city gate.
or the ... , or the ... , or the ... , or the ... , or the ... , or the ... , or the ... ,
total, the ...
... of ...
... Why does he not go ... ?
The goddess Ištar, mistress of the lands, looked steadfastly upon me among all of the rulers and she made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises. She gave me a just scepter that widens borders (and) she put in my hand a merciless rod to fell enemies. She made all of the rulers of the (four) quarters (of the world) from the Upper Sea of the Setting Sun to the Lower Sea of the Rising Sun bow down at my feet.
the towns of Yada' ...
Witness Kunaya, eunuch of ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Issar-šumu-ereš. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I have heard that they are plotting to kill me. I have written to the Palace. They are in my presence. Let the king, my lord, question them.
an estate of 1 hectare 5 decares of land adjoining the road of Hašanu, adjoining the road of Hašanu, adjoining the garden of Adad-ereš, adjoining the garden of Adad-ereš,
1 horse, 1 mule — the commander of the fortress of the Palace Herald.
Land of the Manneans
2 seahs, the 21st day;
of the palace herald.
... has been placed there.
The servants of Bel-ahhe-eriba, the son of the governor of Calah, who appealed to the king, my lord, saying: "We are starving for food," have come to me. I have given them bread and water ...
I conquered the city Arzâ, which is on the border of the land of the Lullumu, and I brought to Assyria twenty talents of gold, one talent of silver, (and) property. I annexed the land of the Lullumu to Assyria (and) placed a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over them.
I had a statue of myself made in the territory of the city Gaza, and I erected (it) in the palace of the city Gaza. I had a statue of the king of Egypt made, and I erected (it) in the city Memphis. I had a statue of the king of the land Meluḫḫa made, and I erected (it) in the city Kār-Bēl-mātāti.
Šamaš-šallim,
Witness Šamaš-ahu-iddina, physician.
a cup of small onions; a cup of quinces;
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, question him.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity ...
... he will take
Samaria
Month Iyyar (II), 15th day, eponym year of Nabû-šarru-uṣur of Marqasa.
As to what you wrote: "A messenger of Urpala'a came to me for an audience with the Phrygian messenger" — let him come, and let Aššur, Šamaš, Bel and Nabû command that all these kings should wipe your sandals with their beards! May the gods of Assyria and Phrygia make peace between you and may they make peace between us!
Tabnî, eunuch of the king, has contracted and bought it from A... for 1/2 mina of the king.
4 (tablets of) exorcists' lore,
From Bel-le'i, descendant of Egibi.
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord.
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-reṣuwa. Good health to the king, my lord!
Sin-na'id, ... , son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN,
before ...
The priest of Adad is saying: "The priest of ...
11 houses ...
governor of ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "The king of Elam has written to me: 'The ... of the king of Assyria ... '"
... he (the god Marduk) commanded that the land be ruled by him (Esarhaddon) and that he (Esarhaddon) should exercise kingship.
An estate of 2 hectares of land belonging to Bahianu,
what I said ...
Witness Inurta-aplu-iddina, ...
... the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... the Itu'eans ...
strong ...
... , a village in its entirety, an estate of 1 hectare 5 decares of land in the town of the chief cupbearer,
... of Assyria ... they will kill, plunder, and loot.
Aššur, Bel, Nabû, ... , the Lady of Kidmuri, the Lady of Arbela, the gods of heaven and earth, the gods of Assyria, the gods of Sumer and Akkad, all the gods of the lands,
I sent ...
Witness NN, ditto of Til-Barsip.
Seal of Sagibî, owner of the ... being sold.
(As for) Ṣil-Bel, the chief of the scouts, who had committed a serious crime, I imposed a harsh punishment upon him.
Tab-shar-Sin, his wife, his 3 sons, total 5;
... the temple of Anu
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
You offer cooked meat before Belet-ili, make a flour/incense-offering, pour oil, honey, beer and wine, and sing: “Mighty ... , queen of the gods, wife of Ea, creator of everything.”
To the king, my lord: your servant, NN. Good health to the king, my lord. Say to the king, my lord: The fortress and the troops of the king are well. The mood of the people of the land is good. The king, my lord, can be glad.
Aššur-rēša-iši, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Mutakkil-Nusku, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-dān (I) (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur:
... him ...
... to the magnates ...
before this ...
... The coils of the colon are 14 in number...
May Bel and Nabû grant to the king my lord day after day, month after month, year after year happiness, health, joy, rejoicing,
I set Šarru-lū-dāri, son of Rūkibtu, their former king, over the people of the city Ashkelon and imposed upon him the payment of tribute (and) gifts (in recognition) of my overlordship so that he (now) pulls my yoke.
Disregard that the subject of this query, Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, ...
At that time the temple of the god Aššur, my lord, which Aššur-nādin-aḫḫē, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Išme-Dagan (II), vice-regent of Aššur, had previously built — that temple had become dilapidated and I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I rebuilt (it) from top to bottom and deposited my monumental inscription.
... the magnates of the palace
A thigh, a shoulder, ribs: the 'House of Many Kings.'
... the vizier
Total, 1 son of his, of his own, of his own, of the crown prince.
The commandant of Cutha has written to me: "The king's men who are in my service have run away. I have sent (word) and they are bringing (them) to me."
Witness NN, chief ...
From ... ya.
... the goddess Ištar ... the goddess Ištar ... the goddess Ištar ... the city Aššur ... the city Aššur ... the city Aššur ...
... his servant, who ...
... and his people,
Adad-nārārī (III),
The money is paid completely. That field is purchased and acquired.
Witness Sagibî, ditto.
The gall bladder is flattened. The 'increment' is normal...
... silver, capital, ... the merchant.
Witness Nergal-šarru-uṣur, chariot driver.
If the moon is surrounded by a halo, and the sun stands in it: there will be truth in the land.
Concerning the city of Arpad, about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Go to Assyria, and let the people of Arpad come to you" — I have gone to Assyria, and the people of Arpad have come to me.
... the town Aššur-belu-taqqin
The day that ... , I shall go to ... and speak with the ...
... let them give
If Jupiter becomes visible in the path of the moon: the king of Akkad will die, and there will be hostility in the land.
And the town of the chief cupbearer ...
Moreover, (as for) Ṣidqâ, the king of the city Ashkelon who had not bowed down to my yoke, I forcibly removed the gods of his father’s house, himself, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his brothers, (and other) offspring of his father’s house and took him to Assyria.
And concerning the city of Til-Barsip about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "It is a fortress of yours; strengthen it!" — I have strengthened it.
The king, my lord, should send word that they should be taken out and put aside.
15 ditto, the lords of the boats;
... to the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
May the goddess Ištar, mistress of battle and war, break his weapon and hand him over to his enemy.
... to the presence ...
... I surrounded (and) conquered the city ... I brought out ... oxen, sheep and goats, ... , (and) possessions, (and) brought (them) to my city Aššur.
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether Bel-emuranni or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or his prefect or his governor or any relative of his, seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Bel-duri and his son,
Concerning the substitute king about whom my lord wrote to me,
... the river Ulāya, which from distant days ...
An estate of 1 hectare 5 decares of land adjoining the road that leads from the village of Zeru-ibni to the village of Nabû-šumu-iddina, the side road to the village of Nabû-šumu-iddina, and the field of Marduk-ereš;
Witness Qurdi-Aššur, son of Šamaš-šumu-ukin.
From Nergal-eṭir.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to his servant: "The work on the river is in progress; let your horses come and stand by until I have finished the work" —
The word of the king to the commandants of the magnates: I am well; you can be glad.
If a planet comes close to a planet and stands there: the king of the world will exercise world dominion; his land will expand; his people will be dispersed; the king of the world will become strong and have no rival; the king of the world will become the most powerful of all rulers and will have no equal; the gods will give the king of the world a just scepter, an eternal throne, and a reign of long duration.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
I shall not ...
Witness Bel-...
Witness Nabû-bani, ditto. Witness Nabû-šallimšunu.
Mitâ of the land Ashkelon, who had not bowed down to my yoke, ... my chariotry, which I had stationed in the land Ashkelon, ... to do battle with him. I brought about his defeat. I captured him alive (and) brought him to my city Aššur. I made him swear by the great gods of heaven and underworld, and imposed upon him a payment of ...
... they are transporting
This is its interpretation.
and the vizier, my lord,
I brought Dunānu (and) Samgunu, sons of Bēl-iqīša — Gambulians whose ancestors had harassed the kings, my ancestors, and, moreover, (who) themselves disturbed my exercising the kingship — together with the numerous troops of the land Gambulu, (iv 15) to Assyria. I placed a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over them. I conquered the city Tīl-Garimme, their fortified city. I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire their cities. (
If the moon is surrounded by a halo, and the Pleiades stand in it: women will give birth to male children; the king's land will expand.
From the beginning I have been a dog who loves the house of his lord. I have been a dog who prays to the gods for the good health of his lord. I have been a dog who ... s the face of his lord. I have been a dog who ... the name of his lord. I have been a dog who ... the words of his lord. I have been a dog who ... the face of his lord.
1 prayer bowl ditto;
To the king, my lord: your servant, Nabû-šumu-iddina, the scribe of the palace supervisor. Good health to the king, my lord. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord. May they give the king, my lord, long days and everlasting years.
Witness NN, commander-of-fifty.
1,000 (homers) of sesame oil, the ...
Nergal-apil-kumua,
This year the moon will complete the day in ...
Witness Ereš-Issar.
10 ditto, hallam;
(As for) Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II), the king of the land Elam who had spoken insolent word(s) on account of the cutting off of the head of Teumman — which a low-ranking soldier of my army had cut off — and his brothers, his family, (and) the seed of his father’s house, together with eighty-five nobles of the land Elam (v 15) who march at his side, who had flown away from the weapons of (the god) Aššur and the goddess
The king, my lord, can be glad.
... you have done
I am herewith sending them to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, question them.
If there is a 'weapon'-mark in the top of the left surface of the 'finger,' it is the weapon of the king of Akkad.
... silver, gold, ... , precious stones, ... , linen garments with multi-colored trim, ... , all kinds of aromatics, ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... ,
Witness Šulmu-ahhe, ditto.
Month Elul (VI), 12th day, eponym year of Sin-šarru-uṣur, treasurer.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
... I have sent ... to greet my lord. The ... of my lord ...
... he will take
Witness Ṭab-šar-Nabû, scribe.
... of the country ...
... he ...
If the earth quakes continuously: attack of the enemy.
the town of Qurdi-...
A tablet of Iqisu to his brother:
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments...
If you should sin against this treaty of Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, and of his brothers, sons by the same mother as Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, concerning whom he has concluded (this) treaty with you,
Witness Nergal-ahu-uṣur, commander-of-fifty of ...
of the Itu'eans ...
... house ...
3,000 (homers) wheat, 3 seahs of oil;
the governor of ...
... the king, my lord
... of the king ...
1, the chariot fighter(s);
I built a palace of breccia, alabaster, elephant ivory, ebony, boxwood, musukkannu-wood, cedar, cypress, juniper, elammaku-wood, (and) Indian wood, for my lordly residence; then I had a house with double doors, a replica of a Hittite palace, constructed opposite (its) gates. I roofed them with beams of cedar, cypress, (and) juniper. I fastened bands of silver and copper on doors of white cedar (and) cypress and
I have heard that the commander-in-chief is in Bit-Zamani.
... -ibni
... of the river ordeal ... the chief eunuch
10 ... ;
... the ... s of the king of Elam
I have written to the Palace. If I have done wrong in the king's eyes, may the king kill me.
The offerings of the king, my lord, are well. The forts of the king, my lord, are well.
of Ištar ...
... he is my servant ...
5 sheep, 1 bowl (of wine): palace supervisor.
... the lands ... , Mannea, ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... ,
... of Marduk-šumu-uṣur
The king, my lord, knows that the eunuchs and the servants of the king, my lord, are in Nineveh. They are waiting for the king, my lord, and are doing their work. The king, my lord, should know (this).
I have written to the magnates concerning the horses, and they are bringing them. I shall write to the king, my lord, as soon as they have brought the horses.
... of the land Bīt-Yakīn, (and) the land Bīt-Amukāni, ... I placed a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over them.
And now, after the king has gone to Elam, the eunuchs and the royal entourage who went with the king to Elam, have returned from Elam.
... the city of Akkad, which had rebelled against me, I conquered in the eponymy of Ashurbanipal, king of Assyria.
Perhaps they will say: "We have not sold any (slaves) to the Egyptians." If they have not sold any, why do they keep taking (them) from the towns? Let them give them back to the Egyptians, and let them go to their work.
The palace of Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria.
Palace of Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), offspring of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad;
adjoining the field of NN,
... he shall not give ... to any other person. He shall return the money tenfold to its owners.
I asked ...
Witness Ninuayu, ...
I have heard that ...
Total 19 gods of the house of Ninurta.
Witness Abunu.
a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
For his life and the well-being of his city, the wall of New City which previously (other) kings who preceded me had built — it had become dilapidated and I rebuilt (it) from top to bottom.
NN, royal bodyguard;
He shall pay in the month of Ab (V). If he does not pay, it shall increase by a fourth.
From Nabû-šuma-iškun.
Total, of the estate of Yadi'-il.
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
Witness Ilu-eriba, cook.
On my return march, I defeated all together the Tuʾumuna, Riḫiḫu, Yadaqqu, Ubudu, Gibrê, Maliḫu (Malaḫu), Gurumu, Ubulu, Damunu, Gambulu, Ḫindaru, Ruʾuʾa, Puqudu, Ḫamrānu, Ḫagarānu, Nabatu, (and) Liʾtaʾu, insubmissive Arameans. I carried off into Assyria a substantial boot
To the king, my lord: your servant, Nabû-šumu-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord. May the gods of Ekur and Nippur and the great gods of heaven and earth ... to the king, my lord.
... Aššur-šumu-ukin
May a later prince restore it (and) return my inscribed name to its place. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
Shalmaneser, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil and vice-regent of Aššur; builder of the temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, my mistress, for the sake of my life.
... of the goddess Ištar
If the Pleiades come close to the top of the moon and stand there: the king will exercise world dominion; his land will expand.
and the dead one ...
Witness Azi-... , ...
Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the rab mūgi, and Nabû-šallim-ahhe, the chief scribe, have made common cause with the king's enemies. They have been inciting the king's subjects, saying: "The king has made common cause with the house of your lords. The king has made common cause with the house of your lords."
5 minas of silver, 5 togas, 5 tunics: the Sartinnu; 10 minas of silver, 10 togas, 10 tunics: the Palace Herald;
If you should sin against this treaty of Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, concerning Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, concerning whom he has concluded this treaty with you, and if you should sin against this treaty of Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord,
The cook takes 1 seah of barley and 1 seah of wheat for the offering of the gods. The confectioner takes 1 seah of barley and 1 seah of wheat for the offering of the gods.
1 talent of ... for 2 ... ;
Total 6 witnesses from Bit-abi-ila'i.
Total, 10 persons, who ... ed the ... of the silver
The governor of Waisi has written to me: "The messenger of the son of Yakin has come to me."
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-šar-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord!
The work on ...
As to what ...
... I have sent ... to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should question him.
... they should come
He said: "Why ...
The people of Babylon ...
The money is paid completely. That field is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The temple of the goddess Ištar, mistress of the city, my mistress, which kings who preceded me had built — (this temple) had become dilapidated and I rebuilt it from top to bottom.
Witness Šulmu-šarri, ...
If the king, my lord, commands, I shall go and speak with them; if not, I shall do as the king, my lord, commands.
... the son of NN
... Bel-ereš ...
... to the king ...
The 'cavity' of the left lung is split...
On the 20th of Nisan (I) he should perform the ritual of the 10th day.
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-alik-pani. Good health to the king, my lord!
As to what you wrote: "May the king, my lord, send word that they should be shown a house in Nineveh and live there, and may I come to the king, my lord, to serve the king, my lord" — I have now written to the Palace Herald, who will give you a house in Nippur.
2 cuts of shoulder. Of 1 ox: the stomach, the liver,
Month Ab (V), 13th day, eponym year of Kanunayu of the New Palace.
... the gods of Nabû-ahhe-... the chief ...
Sennacherib, ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ...
The breast-bone is thick...
Ša-la-ili-mannu, servant of Ah-abû.
... from the day when ...
... to the land Katmuḫu ... the city Tīl-Bāri which ... the land Tabal ... the city Carchemish which ... the land Ḫatti ... the land Hamath ... the city Ḫasuatti ... the land Kummuḫu ... the land Kassubu ... the land Kubušḫatidi ... the land Sūḫu ... the land Melid, the land Tummu, the land Daiēnu, the land Uparia, the land Ušqaya, the land Ušqaya, the land Uš
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
3 (cuts of) meat, salted, of the meal;
Witness Šarru-lu-dari.
In a one-half ikû (stretch) of the water’s (natural) course, I bonded together with bitumen four large limestone (blocks) and spread marsh reeds and rushes over them. As an addition, I took a plot of land that was five hundred and ... cubits long (and) two hundred and eighty cubits wide from the Ḫusur River and from the plain of the city (and) added (it) to the dimensions of the former terrace. In its (the terrace’s) entirety, I raised its superstructure 1
in the city ...
shall place 10 minas of silver (and) one mina of gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
in all 100 horses, 50 mules and 50 donkeys, the servants of Nabû-ahu-iddina ... ,
with ...
Witness NN, scribe of the crown prince.
To the goddess Bēlat-parṣī, the lady of the lands, his lady: Šamšī-Adad, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Ila-kabkabu, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Šamšī-Adad (I), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur:
... -iddina, a servant of Bel-iqiša, has contracted and bought them from ... for x minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
... this ...
NN, 12 oxen,
The gods on the left of Aššur:
(As for) the one who destroys an inscribed object bearing my name, (the name of) my father, (and the name of) my grandfather, (or) does not place (it) with an inscribed object of his (own), may the great gods who reside in heaven and netherworld angrily curse him, overthrow  his kingship, (and) make his name (and) seed disappear from the land.
... to the ...
Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, has contracted and bought them from Šamaš-ila'i for x minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
2 minas of silver, of his seal.
I said: "... "
of the fort ...
17 ditto of garlic;
Witness Tabalayu, ša šēpi guard.
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, then I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, fortified cities, together with the small(er) settlements in their environs (and) the district of the land Bīt-Barrû in its entirety, and I added (this area)
The 'station,' 'path' and 'well-being' are present.
... to our lord ...
The king of the lands, my lord, knows that I am a poor man. I have no house, no maid, no servant, no ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašaredu. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I brought out Padî, their king, from the city Jerusalem and placed (him) on the lordly throne over them, and (then) I imposed upon him payment (in recognition) of my overlordship.
Aḫšēri heard about the advance of my expeditionary force and abandoned the city Izirtu, his royal city. He fled to the city Atrāna, a city upon which he relied, and took refuge (there). I conquered that district. I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire the cities Izirtu (and) Urmēte, cities upon which he relied, together with thirty-four small(er) settlements in their environs.
The god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises.
... garments, felted, ... ;
... Ubru-...
... of ...
Ashurnasirpal, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of Aššur; valiant man who acts with the support of Aššur, his lord, and has no rival among the princes of the
... the god(dess) ...
his sons, his daughters, his family ...
... the tribute of ...
Witness Šumu-abu-ukin.
... the bed ...
Witness Addî.
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, then I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, fortified cities, together with the small(er) settlements in their environs (and) the district of the land Bīt-Barrû in its entirety, and I added (this area)
When the king, my lord, sent me to the Palace, I saw the face of the king, my lord, and my heart became happy. May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
— Saturn stands in the halo of the moon.
If a planet rises in the east: the people of the land will become strong.
(As for) Nergal-ilaya, his brothers, his family, (and) the seed of his father's house, (as well as) the people of the land of Laqû, who had sinned against my treaty (and) cast off the yoke of my lordship, they suffered from dropsy, (that is) “full water.” They died of thirst.
... red, of the country;
Venus is bright, it is good for the land.
The vertebrae are recessed. First extispicy...
... I had a stele made and had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over all of (my) enemies with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, written on it. With inscribed objects of earlier rulers, my ancestors, I deposited (it) for ever after in the citadel wall of Nineveh, my capital city, for the kings, my descendants.
and ...
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
The king, my lord, knows that I am a poor man, that I have no oxen and no sheep. Now, in accordance with the king's command, I have bought a sheep for 1 1/2 minas of silver from a merchant.
Witness ... la, ...
The king, my lord, can be glad.
to the rear of the enemy ...
Because of the evil deeds that he had done, I removed him (Taharqa) from Egypt and Kush and (then) made the people of Egypt and Kush take up hoe(s and) basket(s). I made them carry baskets (of earth) and they made bricks. I cut down his canebrakes and (then) made the people of Egypt and Kush carry hoe(s and) basket(s). I made them dig canals and I made Egypt (and) Kush dwell as if in pastures near the city.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-reši-išši. Good health to the king, my lord!
In the eponymy of Šamaš-šumu-ukin, I marched a second time to the land Ḫabḫu. I conquered the city Šadikanni, the royal city of Ḫabḫu. I brought out of it people, horses, (and) mules and I counted (them) as booty.
Ashurnasirpal, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (II), (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur:
and ...
... whatever he says, let the king, my lord, ask him.
To the king, my lord: your servant Balasî. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Witness Nabû-eriba, deputy.
Witness Handâ, servant of Nabû-šumu-lešir.
4 wooden ... ;
(and) the seal of Hanunu.
Month ... , xth day, eponym year of Šamaš-bēl-uṣur (671 B.C.).
I settled them in the city Ḫarḫar, which is on the shore of the Lower Zab, and I placed them under the authority of a eunuch of mine, the governor of the city Arrapḫa.
Seal of Adad-ahu-iddina, owner of the people being sold.
He shall place x minas of silver and x minas of gold in the lap of DN residing in ...
I said: "Why ...
saying, "...
A tablet of Ia'u-arabu to the palace scribe. Good health to my lord!
... he has not been able to ... , and has not ... ed ...
... Mannu-ki-...
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities ... , Ḫarḫar, (and) Ušnanis, (and) the cities in their environs. I brought out of them people, horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... the ... of the ... s of the ... s of the ... s of the ... s of the ... s of the ... s of the ... s of the ... s of the ... s of the ... s of the ... s of the ... s of the ... s of the ... s of the ... s of the ... s of the ... s of the ... s of the ... s of the ... s of the ... s of the ... s of the ... s of the ... s of the ... s of the ... s of the ... s of the ...
Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, has contracted and bought them from Šumma-ilani for 8 minas of silver by the mina of the king.
I have heard that the people of the city have become afraid and are staying in the fortress of the Assyrians. The town of the commander-in-chief is well.
... of my lord ...
Now then I am sending to the king, my lord, the letter which he sent to me. The king, my lord, should read it.
From the city of Kišesim as far as the city of Ḫarḫar, x leagues x stretches x rods, from the city of Ḫarḫar as far as the city of Assur, x leagues x stretches x rods.
Isana
(As for) Aḫšēri, who did not fear my lordly majesty, (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar placed him in the hands of his servants. The people of his land incited a rebellion against him (and) they cast his corpse into a street of his city. They cut down with the sword the soldiers of his army who had committed crime(s) (and) hung their corpses on poles.
... the king, my lord
If the rising of the Plough star is very bright: the harvest of the land will prosper.
If Venus becomes visible in Sivan (III): the king of the Westland will die.
Total, 7 of ...
in all 6 women.
... the king, my lord,
of the king from ...
... of the temple of Anu ...
Witness Kenî, mayor of Nineveh.
to ...
... came ...
Now, if you wish to do good, let me give you the following order: As long as you are here, do not go anywhere else! As soon as I have sent word and brought the ... , you may go where you wish.
I had a stele made, had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, written on it, and I erected (it) in (that) city.
... the river Ulāya
The 'well-being' is present. The 'path' is present.
NN and his people, Iglî and his people,
Concerning the house of the palace supervisor about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "What is the matter?" —
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial payment from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
... jars of wine ...
The clothing (and) the jewellery are at the disposal of the Assyrian Ištar.
... s of ... of his servant
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let 1,000 archers come to my presence to do my work" — I have sent 1,000 archers to the king, my lord. If the king, my lord, commands, let them come and do the work. If not, let the king, my lord, write me what the king, my lord, commands. I have written to the king, my lord, only as a reminder. The king, my lord, may do as he deems best.
... I have not heard ...
... is ...
... I mustered my chariotry (and) troops. I marched to the land Ḫatti. I conquered the city Aramu, which is on the shore of the sea. I crossed over the Euphrates. I conquered the city Ḫamat. I conquered the city Ḫamat-šarri. I conquered the city Ḫamat-šarri-uṣur. I conquered the city Ḫamat-šarri-iqbi. I conquered the city Ḫ
... the king, my lord, sent a messenger to the son of Yakin. The son of Yakin has sent a messenger to the king, my lord, saying: "The king, my lord, has sent a messenger to me. I have sent him to the king, my lord, saying: 'The king, my lord, has sent a messenger to me. Let me send you a report of the king, my lord, concerning the son of Yakin.'"
If the Scales' position is stable: there will be reconciliation and peace in the land.
of Nabû-na'id ...
I dismantled the outposts that I had constructed against Baʾalu, the king of the land Tyre. By sea and dry land, I opened (all of) his routes, as many as I had seized. I received from him his substantial payment. I turned around (lit. “I turned the front of my yoke”) and returned safely to Nineveh, my capital city.
Witness Sasî, cohort commander.
... the army of the Elamite ...
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me, I have sent the ... to the Palace. They are bringing ...
10 ditto, hallam;
Witness Šep-Aššur, ...
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord.
Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, who is now intent on sending ... to the district of ... ,
2 (cuts of) meat, 1 goose, 1 duck;
... ;
I, Tiglath-pileser (III), great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of Sumer (and) Akkad, king of the four quarters (of the world), (re)built (and) completed the temple of the god Adad, my lord, which is inside the city Ḫarrān.
Witness Šep-ahhe.
... the chieftains of the land Ḫatti, the land Karalla, the land Šarnida, the land Meḫru, the land Salua, the land Uqumanu, the land Mannea, the land Naʾiri, the land ... , the land Andia, the land Zikirtu, the land Urarṭu, the land ... , the land Ušpia, the land Ušpia, the land Ušpia, the land Ušpia, the land Ušpia, the land Ušpia, the land Uš
I sent a messenger to Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II) regarding these matters. He detained the eunuch of mine whom I had sent (Marduk-šarru-uṣur) and did not give a reply to my word(s). (ii 10') Later, he wrote to me in insult: “You are but a dead dog. I have no use for you.”
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "What is it that they are saying?" —
... the heart ...
Witness Uburutu.
(As for) the Cimmerians, a dangerous enemy who had never feared my ancestors, and, with regard to me, had not grasped the feet of my royal majesty, (iii 10') with the support of the gods Aššur, Bēl (Marduk), and Nabû, the great gods, my lords, he (Gyges) clamped (them) in manacles, handcuffs, (and) neck-stocks and sent (them) before me, together with his substantial audience gift(s). I constantly saw the might of the
1 sisalhu ox, 1 male sheep — Yahuṭu;
... the Urarṭian(s) ...
After I had made the statue of Aššur, the great lord, my lord, and the statue of the great gods, the ... of the temple of Aššur, the great lord, my lord, and the statue(s) of the great gods, the ... of the temple of Aššur, the great lord, my lord, (and) the statue(s) of the great gods, the ... of the temple of Aššur, the great lord, my lord, I had the sanctuaries of the temple of Aššur, the great lord, my lord, (
... the land of Akkad
God Aššur, the great mountain, grantor of scepter and crown, father of the gods, lord of the lands; god Anu, the foremost, the one who decrees destinies, the one who devises the fates; god Enlil, the one who formulates the designs of heaven and underworld, the one who inspects the totality of the four quarters; god Ea, the one who fashioned the physique of my royal majesty, the one who made my features resplendent; god Sîn, the one who makes my royal majesty shine forth
... of Elam ...
Does your great divinity know it? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Disregard the (formulation) of the prayer for today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-belu-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! The city of Der and the fort are well.
he ...
total ...
The servants of the king, your father, who were in Elam
... will he instigate an insurrection and rebellion against Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, or against Assurbanipal, the crown prince of the Succession Palace?
... and
I have written to you; why have you not written to me? I am waiting for your messenger. As soon as he comes, I shall send you my men.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Witness Nabû-abu-uṣur, ...
Witness Silim-ili.
Samaria, ...
... , eponym year of ...
NN, servant of ...
... of the town of Yah...
... the land of the goddess Ištar ...
... their ... s
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), capable shepherd, favorite of the great gods, guardian of truth who loves justice, renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the insubmissive, (and) the one who strikes enemies with lightning:
... I have not heard. The ... of the chief of accounts
(As for) Bēl-ibni, son of Bunnannū, a Gambulian whose residence is located twelve leagues distance in water and swamps, by the command of the god Aššur, my lord, fear of my royal majesty overwhelmed him and unprovoked fear fell upon him. He brought tribute and payment, yearly, without ceasing, before me, and he kissed my feet.
Ditto by all the gods of the universe!
When I heard this piece of insolence, I wrote to the Palace: "Let me come and speak with him in the presence of the king." Now then I am coming, and shall speak with him in the presence of the king. I have heard that he has said to the Palace: "I will not give ... to anybody."
If a planet ... in the sky: the days of the ruler will become long.
240 — (governor of) Barhalza.
20 minas of black wool;
... he has not come to greet me. What is it that the king, my lord, commands?
Witness ... -zeru-ibni.
1 seah 1 'litre' of regular offering loaves;
The king should ask the ... of the king, my lord, whether or not ...
I brought back all together the chariots along with their horses, whose drivers had been killed in the thick of (that) mighty battle and which had themselves been released so that they galloped about on their own. When the second double-hour of the night had passed, I stopped their slaughter.
4 ... ;
... the palace herald of the land of Akkad ...
The king, my lord, knows that the land of the queen mother is in good shape.
To the treasurer, my lord: your servant, Nabû-šumu-iddina. The very best of health to the treasurer, my lord.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, (or) changed or altered the proceedings...
a ditto of small onions;
... his ... s
Moreover, he, the king of the land Elam, heard about the conquest of his cities and fear fell upon him.
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šarru-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord!
The day when the king comes, we shall bring the bulls and the mules. The king, my lord, may do as he deems best.
... cavalry ...
5 — Ilu-dan,
I myself prayed to the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela, the great gods, my lords, for victory over (my) strong enemy and they immediately heeded my prayers (and) came to my aid.
... I have sent ... to the king, my lord. The ... s of the king, my lord, ...
If on the 14th day the moon and sun are seen together: reliable speech; the land will become happy; the gods will remember Akkad favorably.
I have given 120 sheep to the people of the Inner City, 100 to the people of Calah, 100 to the people of Nineveh, 100 to the people of Dur-Šarruken, and 100 to the people of the Palace.
... to me
The silver shall increase by a fourth.
they are plotting ...
... the elders ...
Witness Puṭi-ilani. Witness Nabû-zeru-ibni.
From the city of Kar-Aššur as far as the city of ... , from the city of ... as far as the city of Šabirešu, from the city of Šabirešu as far as the city of Tīl-Barsip, ...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract,
If there is a solar eclipse in Nisan (I) on the 14th day, it begins in the east and clears in the west: the king of the Westland will rule the land of his enemy; the king of the Westland will defeat his enemy; the king of the Westland will rule the land of his enemy; the king of the Westland will conquer the land of his enemy.
1 goose, 1 duck, 10 turtledoves.
To the king, my lord: your servant Akkullanu. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
From Nabû-šuma-iškun.
Palace of Sargon (II), king of Assyria.
Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the city Ḫamanu, a royal city of the land Elam.
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also great king, strong king, king of the world, (and) king of Assyria; valiant man who acts with the support of Aššur, his lord, and has no rival among the princes of the four quarters, marvelous she
From this day, the 1st day of this month, the month ... of this year, to the 10th day of the month ... of this year, for ... days and nights, the term stipulated for the performance of (this) extispicy — within this stipulated term,
Witness Bel-...
I shall do and finish ...
The forts and the land of Assyria are well. Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, is well. The crown prince of the Succession Palace is well. The crown prince of the House of Aššur is well. The crown prince of the House of Succession is well. The crown prince of the House of Gahal is well. The crown prince of the House of Kingship is well. The crown prince of the House of Lahiru is well. The crown prince of the House of Aššur-etel-šamê is well. The crown
May the god Aššur, the great lord, ... look upon my deeds with pleasure and may a good word for me be set upon his lips! May he determine as my fate a long life, fullness of old age, good health, and happiness! May he ... my ... , may he ... my ... , may he ... my ... , may he ... my ... , may he ... my ... , may he ... my ... , may he ... my ... , may he ... my ... , may he ... my ... , may he ... my ... , may he ... my ... , may he ... my ... , may
I sent my messenger to Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II) regarding these matters. He detained the eunuch of mine whom I had sent (Marduk-šarru-uṣur) and did not give a reply to my word(s). (iii 5') Ummanigaš sent a message to me, saying: “You are a mighty king. Why do you act arbitrarily?” I sent (my) messenger back to him, telling him: “I have done nothing wrong. (iii 10') I have not acted arbitrarily
From Nabû'a of Assur.
... Nergal-naṣir
Witness ... -ilu, eunuch.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did you not write to me?" I have now written to the palace.
Nabû-eriba, ... ; 2 sons; 3 women; in all 6 people.
Nabû-naṣir, prefect;
total, 10 ...
If it is agreeable to the king, my lord, let the king, my lord, send a bodyguard to the Inner City, and let him bring me the sealed order which the king, my lord, sent me.
If there is a 'weapon'-mark in the left side of the 'finger': my army will take the booty of the enemy's army.
... your ...
Witness Zarutî, scribe.
Witness Ahu-nuri, chief of the reed.
the ...
The king, my lord, should ask them where the horses are being  brought in.
Sukkaya,
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
The king of Babylon, ... , the ... of the king of Elam, the governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, the king of the land of the Bīt-Yakīn, the governor of the land of the Bīt-Amukāni, the governor of the land of the Bīt-Šilāni, the governor of the land of the Bīt-Šaʾalli, the governor of the land of the Bīt-Dakkūri, the governor of the land of the Bīt-
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), leader of a widespread population, the one who fashioned image(s) of the deities Aššur, Anu, Sîn, Šamaš, Adad, Nergal, Ištar of Bīt-Kidmuri, Bēlet-ilī, and the great gods, the one who carries out to perfection the forgotten rites of Ešarra through divination,
1 seah 1 'litre' of bread, 1 seah of beer — the temple steward.
The king, my lord, can be glad.
In the left side of the gall bladder there is a hole.
The king of Elam has sent a messenger to the city of Assur, saying: "Let me come and speak with you." I am sending him to the king, my lord.
... my messenger
Concerning Nabû-aplu-iddina, the ... of the king, my lord, about whom my brother wrote to me: "...
To the king of the lands, my lord: your servant NN. May DNN bless the king of the lands, my lord!
This is from before Aššur.
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, question him.
(As for) the exalted chariot, the vehicle of the god Marduk, the pre-eminent one among the gods, the lord of lords, I completed its feature(s) with gold, silver, (and) precious stones. I gave (it) as a gift to the god Marduk, the king of the totality of heaven and netherworld, the one who overwhelms my enemies.
adjoining the house of Issar-šumu-ereš,
The judgment which the vizier and the magnates imposed upon me:
(Property) of Marduk-šallim-ahhe, king of the world, king of Babylon, king of Sumer (and) Akkad.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say:
I conquered the city Ḫarḫar, which is on the border of the land Elam, and I brought out of it people, young (and) old, horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty.
10 shoots (of sesame);
He shall return the money tenfold to its owner. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
From Ašaredu.
I have heard that the servants of Marduk-šarru-uṣur, the governor, have been sold for money. The king, my lord, should ask the servants of Marduk-šarru-uṣur whether or not they are his servants. If they are, the king, my lord, should question them.
... the king, my lord, knows that I am a poor man, that I have no oxen, no sheep, no ... , no servants, no ... , (and that) I have no ... ; (yet) the king, my lord, has given me a field, a house, and servants.
14 tablets, ... ,
20 cavalry mounts from the (governor) of Bit-Zamani;
The money is paid completely. Those women are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
When you are to strew salt before Nabû, you say: “Nabû, accept (sg.) life!”
1 bow, ... , Ahu-... , ...
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, pious prince, beloved of the god Aššur and the goddess Mullissu, the one who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, the one who (re)confirmed the interrupted sattukku- (and) nindabû-offerings, the one who (re)confirmed the interrupted nindabû-offerings to Esagil and Ezida, the one who (re)conf
The commander-in-chief shall have the usufruct of the field for a number of years.
Witness Nabû-ahhe-iddina, baker.
The elders of Elam have written to us:
Now then I am sending to the king, my lord, the messenger of mine who went to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, ask him what ...
O god Ninurta, the warrior, the one who loves my priesthood, look with pleasure upon my good deeds and, by your exalted command, kill my enemies, cut down my foes, (and) make me stand over my enemies in victory (and) triumph so that I may rule (and) govern wherever my heart wishes.
the forts ...
... the governor of Arrapha
Witness Didî.
2 jerboas;
The 26th day: let him kill a snake.
a flagon of beer of bruised grain, a flagon of beer of barley, a flagon of beer of ... ;
... who are in Elam ...
the governor of Calah ...
1 necklace of ... , 1 breastpiece, 1 ... ,
1 ... -garment, felted, edging ... , belonging to Bel-Harran-šarru-uṣur, ...
Witness Puṭi-ši.
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), capable shepherd, favorite of the great gods, guardian of truth who loves justice, renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the insubmissive, (and) the one who strikes enemies with lightning:
... he shall not give to any other person. Whoever breaks the contract, shall give 10 minas of silver.
The bread of the temple of Aššur is excellent. The guard of the temple of Aššur is well. The temple of Aššur is well.
1, the Aramean(s),
Witness Mušezib-Aššur, ...
... the priest of the bēt ēqi
... this ...
Witness Se'-ila'i, ditto.
The palace of Amēl-Marduk, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods;
News of the son of Yakin: he is in Elam.
... I have ...
... the king, my lord, knows that the chief eunuch and the magnates are going to the district of Media. They are taking horses and oxen with them. The king, my lord, should know (this too). The horses and oxen are the king's property.
... Šarru-šumu-ukin, the son of the rab mūgi
At that time, the wall of my city Aššur, which previously (other) kings who preceded me had built, had become dilapidated and old. I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I rebuilt (it) from top to bottom. I made it thicker than before. I made it reach from the ziggurrat of the god Adad, my lord, to the Craftsman's Gate, on the north side, (and) I made (it) face the river. I made (it) ten bricks thick. I made (it
... I have written to him
... the commander-in-chief of the palace ...
The bakers take 2 litres of bread, the brewers 2 litres of beer. The crown prince takes 2 litres of bread, 2 litres of beer. The magnates take 4 litres of bread, 4 litres of beer.
... to the Babylonians, saying: "Let me give you the land of Akkad in exchange for the land of Elam." The king, my lord, should know (this).
... Witness ...
... their men
You shall not make common cause with his enemy. You shall not give Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, an evil weapon to take to the field against his enemies. You shall not seize him and put him to death, nor hand him over to his enemy. You shall not oust him from the kingship of Assyria, nor swear an oath to any other king or any other lord. You shall not give him a deadly drug to eat or to drink, nor anoint him with it, nor practice
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me:
... Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, who is now intent on sending ...
1 necklace of ... , 1 breastpiece, 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... ,
... I shall go to ...
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments...
Witness Abi-yaqar.
Dannaya, farmer, and his people; ... ; ... -šarri, farmer, and his people; ... ;
Month of Adar (XII), 12th day.
The son of Yakin ...
... the middle of the 'path' is effaced. The breast-bone ...
The lady Dunnaša-amur is placed as a pledge.
... I have not heard any news of them. The men who went with them have not returned, nor have they sent a letter to the king, my lord. I have heard that ...
in the city of Arbela ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šarru-emuranni. Good health to the king, my lord!
From Nergal-eṭir.
... to the lord of kings
4 ditto of sesame oil for 70 sheep.
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Ashur-bunaya-usur,
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Mannu-ki-Ninua or his sons or his grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Šumma-ilani, his sons and his grandsons,
Month Iyyar (II), 28th day, eponym year of Aššur-naṣir.
3 gowns, the front red, of the port, ... ;
Witness Inurtî.
20 turtledoves.
... the fowler
If the day reaches its normal length: a reign of long days ... ; the years of the king will be many.
... the town of ...
... the xth day;
The king's word to the commander-in-chief: I am well; you can be glad.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Il-abu-uṣur or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or his prefect or the mayor of his city or any relative of his, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Remanni-Adad, his sons and his grandsons,
The king, my lord, knows that the Arabs are very numerous. They have set up camp in the district of the king, my lord, and are plundering the sheep of the king, my lord.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the ... th day of this month, the month Iyyar (II), to the ... th day of the month Sivan (III) of this year,
Bel-aplu-iddina, son of Nabû-ahhe-iddina, servant of Nabû-šarru-uṣur —
This is from the series.
... very
If a planet stands in ... : ... will die.
The 5th day ...
NN, bodyguard of the crown prince;
... as we
of the treaty ...
The crown prince, my lord, should send word that they should be shown a house in Nineveh.
Witness Nabû-šallim, ša šēpi guard.
Son of Issar-nadin-apli, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Išme-Dagan (II), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Išme-Dagan (II) (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of the god Aššur:
Witness Habasti, chariot driver.
Total, of Adad-remanni, the cohort commander.
The 'well-being' is present.
... as ...
... or the ...
I asked him about the news of the Urarṭian, and he told me: "The Urarṭian has sent a messenger to the Mannean, saying: 'Let us stand together and ... the Assyrian ... '"
Month of Shebat (XI), 8th day, eponym year of Bel-Harran-šadû'a (650).
To the king, my lord: your servant PN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Bel and Nabû bless the king, my lord.
An estate of ... adjoining the field of ...
I, Šamaš-rēša-uṣur, governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, ... , son of Iqīša-Marduk, ditto (governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari), ... , descendant of Uayyāmu, ditto (governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari), ... , one of an enduring lineage,
Assurbanipal ...
Ibniya, son of NN, the scribe of the palace, has contracted and bought him from Riṣaya for x minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
NN, farmer, and his people;
Marduk-šumu-uṣur, Naṣiru, Tabnî, ...
Son of Nabû-apla-iddina, the šandabakku (governor of Nippur), descendant of Nabû-šuma-iškun, the šandabakku (governor of Nippur), one of an enduring lineage, ...
the prefects and their ...
Abi-ila'i,
... to the presence
The money is paid completely. That ... is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
I am herewith sending to the king, my lord, Nabû-duru-uṣur, his wife, his son, his daughter, his two maids, his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... ,
... If the king, my lord, commands, I will send them to the king.
I shall ...
Concerning the news of Bel-iqiša, the messenger of the king, my lord, about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Send him here!" — I sent him to the king, my lord, on the 11th of Adar (XII).
Concerning the order that the king, my lord, gave me about which I wrote to the king, my lord: "Write me what it is" —
If the moon becomes visible in Tebet (X) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour Subartu; a foreigner will rule the Westland.
... from Urad-...
In the corridors, I made openings for latticed windows. At their gates, I stationed apotropaic figures of alabaster (and) elephant ivory.
When the god Marduk, the great lord, entrusted to me the lordship of the lands, he commanded me to plunder the land of the Arameans. I captured alive the king of the land of the Arameans, together with his nobles, and brought (them) to Assyria. I flayed the skin from the king of the land of the Arameans and hung (it) around the neck of Dunānu.
... I shall not ...
... days
2 talents, the 'residences' of the scribes;
4 minas of silver belonging to Inurta-ila'i, at the disposal of Šamaš-ila'i, son of Ilu-isse'a, at the disposal of Šamaš-ila'i, son of Ilu-isse'a.
If a fog rolls in Shebat (XI): eclipse of the Kassites.
Seal of Šamaš-... ,
Whoever seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Šumma-ilani, his sons (or) his grandsons, shall pay 10 minas of silver.
writing-board ...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Nabû-šarru-uṣur or his son or his grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Šumma-ilani,
Marduk-...
Witness Tab-šar-Ashur.
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "The troops should be assembled and ready, and you should be on the alert; until I send you orders, do not go out of the pass of Hubuškia" — I am doing as the king, my lord, wrote to me.
The chariot-driver of the king, my lord, should go and speak with the ... s, and the king, my lord, should give orders to the ... s that they should bring the logs to the river bank. The king, my lord, should also give orders to the Itu'eans that they should bring the logs to the river bank.
You shall not conceal (or) protect the enemy's infiltration into your country.
Concerning ... about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
On my second campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me and I marched to the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians, who since time immemorial had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors. In the high mountains, difficult terrain, I rode on horseback and had my personal chariot carried on (men’s) necks. In very rugged terrain I roamed about on foot like a wild bull.
The king should ask them ...
I put to the sword the population of the city Ḫirimmu, a dangerous enemy, and I did not spare a single one. I hung their corpses on poles and placed (them) around the city. I reorganized that district (and) imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the gods of Assyria, my lords.
of Assyria ...
The king, my lord, should ask the chief eunuch and the cohort commander whether or not the king, my lord, has given orders to them.
Witness Urdu, ditto.
and ...
... he is
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
... he will plunder
... the deputy of the palace herald
an estate of 40 hectares of sown land;
The 17th day: joy of heart.
8 females, 5 maids;
... is well.
... of the king to the river ordeal
1, Šumma-Adad, ... ;
8 (cuts of) meat, of ... ;
Witness Sukkaya.
... the king, my lord, ...
Witness Aššur-šumu-uṣur.
... I marched to the land Ḫatti. I conquered the city ... , the royal city of Aramu, the Urarṭian. I brought forth his booty, possessions, (and) property, (and) brought (them) to my city Aššur. I conquered the city Uppume, the royal city of Uppis, the Ḫamatite. I brought forth his booty, possessions, (and) property, (and) brought (them) to my city Aššur. I conquered the city U
to ...
If the moon at its appearance wears a crown: the king will reach the highest rank. — The moon will complete the day.
... of NN
Tabni-aplu-iddina, son of Banaya, ...
the town of Sairi ...
... all ...
An estate of 1 hectare 5 decares of land, a threshing floor, adjoining the threshing floor of the palace herald, adjoining the threshing floor of Aplaya, adjoining the threshing floor of the palace herald,
I have written to you; do not be negligent ... !
Moreover, (as for) the later rulers who came after me, the god Aššur, my lord, made them bow down to my yoke. (As for) Tandāya, the king of the land Katmuḫu, who had not bowed down to the kings, my ancestors, he bowed down to my yoke. He brought to Nineveh, my capital city, his daughter, together with a substantial dowry, to serve as a housekeeper, and he kissed my feet. I imposed upon Tandāya an annual payment of large horses.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "... "
From Balasî.
I took the road in pursuit of Tanutamon (and) I marched as far as the city Thebes, his fortified city. He saw the assault of my battle array and abandoned the city Thebes; he fled to the city Kipkipi.
I have written to the palace. May the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
... a bowl of wine
... the Itu'eans whom the king, my lord, sent to me, saying: "Let them go and ... the ... of the king, my lord, and bring down the logs" — they have gone and ... ed the logs. The Itu'eans who went with them have not yet returned. The king, my lord, should send (word) that they should bring down the logs. I shall wait for them, and as soon as they have returned, I shall send the logs to the king, my lord.
... the gods of Assyria and Babylonia have blessed the king, my lord.
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, wise prince, circumspect ruler, shepherd of the people, (and) leader of a widespread population, I:
The woman Tab... ;
The king who accepts their gifts, the shepherd who has charge over them, and the herdsman who properly administers them, I:
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhe.
... the crown prince ...
Adad-nerari (III), overseer, son of Šamši-Adad (V), overseer, son of Shalmaneser (III), likewise overseer.
As for me, I am a servant who reveres his great divinity. I am a humble, pious, submissive, and reverent man who is constantly attentive to his great divinity. (As for) the people of the land of Akkad, who had rebelled against him (and) sided with the enemy, I was not negligent about (my) duty as a shepherd. I mustered my troops (and) took the road to the land of Akkad. I marched furiously (and) quickly (and) entered the city Bīt-
... Witness Pa...
Witness Ša-la-mašê, priest of Ninurta.
The palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of the universe, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of the universe: facing (brick) of the temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh.
... and when ...
... the land of the king, my lord, will not become happy ...
... of the 'weapon'-mark is split...
I have given 15 minas to NN.
I have heard that the servants of the king, my lord, have been sold for money to the son of Zabayu. I have written to the king, my lord, (about this) as soon as I heard (it).
Ninurta-kudurrī-uṣur, ... of the city of Calah, has contracted and bought (said property) from Zakiru for ...
I worked on the great wall of New City from its foundations to its crenellations. I made it 40 bricks thick and raised it 120 courses of brick high. I made the wall of Inner City 20 bricks thick and raised it 100 courses of brick high. I made the wall of the Step Gate 20 bricks thick and raised it 100 courses of brick high. I made the wall of the Kalkal Gate 20 bricks thick and raised it 100 courses of brick high.
An estate of x hectares of land of the citizens of Nineveh
In the eponymy of Aššur-...
If the moon at its appearance ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... your ... s
Witness Zar-Issar.
in accordance with the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord, and your favorable decisions, should the subject of this query, Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, strive and plan?
To the king, my lord: your servant Inurta-belu-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord!
... , the king of the lands, my lord, is the sun of all the people.
Witness Silim-Aššur, grand vizier.
to greet ...
... the palace herald ...
Month Iyyar (II), 5th day, eponym year of NN.
... of the house of Ilu-iṣṣur
Witness Nabû-eṭir, chief tailor.
1, Abi-ram, the prefect of the town of Šabirešu;
16, 8, total 20 — ...
Witness Inurta-šumu-uṣur, scribe.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nadin-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
The palace of Adad-nārārī, king of the universe, son of Arik-dīn-ili, king of Assyria: (brick) belonging to the forecourt of the temple of the goddess Ištar.
2 black horses,
The land of the king is well; the temples are well; the forts of the king are well.
The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired.
... of the house of your father
Seal of Se'-sakâ, owner of the woman being sold.
The palace of Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, son of Sennacherib, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria.
I have heard that the chief eunuch has said to the king, my lord: "The  king, my lord, should not send me to Bit-Kari." I have heard it;  let the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
Month Iyyar (II), 20th day, eponym year of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, governor of Samaria.
... Ariye ...
... to the city ... in the district of the city of Kar-Issar.
6 minas, NN, for ... ;
From Adad-šumu-uṣur.
... the governors ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ra'im-nišešu. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
He shall pay in the month of Shebat (XI). If he does not pay, it shall increase by a third.
... the news of Zabdâ ...
Ninurta-iddin, his wife, his 2 sons, a total of 4 persons, servants of Nabû-šumu-iddina —
2 ... ;
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether NN or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or ... , and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Aššur-šallimanni, his sons and his grandsons, shall place x minas of refined silver and x minas of pure gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
... of Kar-Nergal
40 years Ashur-nerari king of Assyria.
... the palace personnel
On the 21st day of the month of Nisan (I) I shall set out and go.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
6, 7, 7 — (province of) the city Samaria.
81 82 ... , 73 ... , 10 ... ,
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
... s of Arbela
230 (hectares) of sown land, 100 (hectares) under cultivation therein; 100 (hectares) of sown land, 100 (hectares) under cultivation therein; in the town of Qurdi-Aššur, in the steppe of the town of Yabrê.
The king, my lord, should send a royal bodyguard to the house of the chief ... , and let them bring the ...
Month Ab (V), 25th day, eponym year of Mannu-ki-Adad.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say:
... huzunu, his son, adolescent; 1 woman; 1 ... ;
... the land of the Lullumu, the land of the Bīt-Ḫumria (Israel), the land of the Bīt-Ammon, the land of the Bīt-Ḫamban, the land of the Bīt-Zualzaš, the land of the Bīt-Šaʾalli, the land of the Bīt-Šaʾalli-bīt-Ḫamban, the land of the Bīt-Šaʾalli-bīt-Ḫamban, the
... in the presence of the king, my lord, ...
I had foundation inscriptions made of silver, gold, bronze, lapis lazuli, alabaster, basalt, pendû-stone, elallu-stone, (and) white limestone, (as well as) inscribed objects of baked clay, and (then) I depicted on them hieroglyphs representing the writing of my name. I wrote on them the might of the great hero, the god Marduk, (and) the deeds that I had done, my pious work, (and) I placed (these inscriptions) in the foundations (and)
The town of Rihiya.
The one who drove out Nabû-zēr-kitti-līšir, son of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), who had put his trust in the king of the land Elam, but could not save his life — Naʾid-Marduk, his brother, fled from the land Elam to serve me, came to Nineveh, my capital city, before me, and kissed my feet. I made the entire Sealand, the domain of his brother, subject to him. (ii 15)
Nabû-ušallim,
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Eltekeh (and) Tamnâ. I approached the city Ekron and I killed the governors (and) nobles who had committed crime(s) and hung their corpses on towers around the city; I counted the citizens who had committed the criminal acts as booty; (and) I commanded that the rest of them, (those) who were not guilty of crimes or wrongdoing, (to) whom no penalty was due, be allowed to go free.
Nabû-... , ... of the crown prince;
Witness Šulmu-ahhe.
3 shekels of silver belonging to Bahianu, at the disposal of Zabinu.
Total 11 ...
Witness Nanî.
The land of the king is well; the forts are well.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ululayu. The best of health to the king, my lord! Assyria is well, the temples are well, all the king's forts are well. The king, my lord, can be glad indeed.
... the land of ...
... of the Chaldeans
I shall send ...
saying, "...
... I said to him: "... to Assurbanipal ... you will die! ... Assurbanipal ... to you ... "
5 mares:
He has ... ed ... and ... ed 100 minas of ... from the Aššur temple, and has given it to NN, the ... of the town of ... , saying: "... to the prefect of the town of ... "
... before Bel
I will destroy the land of Akkad and all the lands.
The king, my lord, knows that the day I arrive in the king my lord's presence, I shall bring the (barley) rations.
Witness ... -ahhe.
the town of Kar-Apladad ...
May the god Adad, the canal inspector of heaven and earth, strike your land with terrible lightning (and) afflict your land with want. May the god Adad, the canal inspector of heaven and earth, ... your fields with devastation.
Witness Nabû-šumu-... , scribe, keeper of the contract.
... let them do
(               broken               )
... Paširu ...
... from the beginning ...
... Esarhaddon
I have written to the king, my lord, (about) the work of the palace scribe, but he has not agreed to do the work. He has not agreed to do the work of the palace scribe, but has turned his face towards me. He has not agreed to do the work of the palace scribe, but has turned his face towards me. He has not agreed to do the work of the palace scribe, but has turned his face towards me. He has not agreed to do the work of the palace scribe, but has turned his face towards me. He has not agreed to do the work of
the rites ...
Total — Issar-mukinnia.
If the moon is surrounded by a halo, and Regulus stands in it: in that year women will give birth to male children.
The city Ṣiṣṣirtu.
Seal of Sasî, owner of the man being sold.
As to the news of the king of Babylon, ...
... I sent my ... to them, saying: "Let them be taken out and put aside!" They said: "We are not criminals. We are the king's servants. We have been sent to ... "
Muṣurayu, ... ;
From Munnabitu.
Ulūlu (VI), twenty-first day, eponymy of Bēl-ēmuranni, governor of the city Ḫindānu (648).
adjoining ...
among the captives whom ...
Witness Ubru-Nabû, keeper of the tablet.
I decorated them with silver (and) copper knobbed nails. I adorned the arches, friezes, and all of their copings with baked bricks (glazed in the color of) obsidian (and) lapis lazuli. I adorned the parapets with baked bricks (glazed in the color of) lapis lazuli.
To the king, my lord: your servant Šarru-emuranni. Good health to the king, my lord!
The temple of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, which Sennacherib, king of Assyria, my forefather, had previously built — that temple had become dilapidated and I rebuilt it from top to bottom. I deposited my monumental inscription.
Witness Hiriṣayu.
The lord of kings should send a bodyguard to the town where they are encamped, and ... should be given to them.
... Esaggil and Babylon ...
Month ... , xth day, eponym year of Zazaya.
Witness NN, servant of Bel-iqiša.
owner of the ... being sold.
If the moon at its appearance wears a crown: the harvest of the land will prosper; the land will dwell as if in pastures near the city; the king will reach the highest rank.
15 shekels of silver belonging to Bahianu, at the disposal of Šumma-Adad.
(Property) of Marduk-šāpik-zēri, king of the world.
Palace of Sennacherib, king of Assyria: (This is) the audience gift that Karib-il, king of the land Saba, presented to me. Whoever places (it) in the service of a god (or another) person (or) erases my inscribed name, may the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Adad, ... , Nabû, (and) Uraš make his name (and) his seed disappear.
... in Der
The king, my lord, should send word that they should be shown a house in Nineveh, and let them stay there until I come.
an estate of 1 hectare 5 decares adjoining Marduk-ereš and Ilu-ereš;
We kept watch on the 29th day; we saw the moon. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king my lord!
in all, 6: the 'residences' of ...
... the town of Harihumba
At the beginning of my kingship, after I sat in greatness on (my) royal throne, Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), king of Karduniaš (Babylonia), a man who had committed crime(s) and transgressed against the treaty (sworn) by the great gods, (iii 5') a rebel (with) a treacherous mind, a person who had not respected my friendship, a traitor who had sinned against my kindness, a rebel (with) a treacherous mind,
to Ilu-...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-pašir. Good health to the king, my lord! May Sin and Nikkal bless the king, my lord!
... of the son of Yakin
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-belu-taqqin. Good health to the king, my lord!
4 minas of silver, 2 tunics, 3 togas: the Chief Confectioner;
saying, "Why ...
... here ...
10 ... -garments, felted, ... ;
... of the palace
Month Elul (VI), 20th day, eponym year of Mannu-ki-Adad.
my lord knows that ...
... I said: "... I will not give ... to you. You are ... ; you are not to give ... to anybody. You are my servants; ... of the land of Akkad ... you will give ... to my ... "
... the town of Šamaš-... ,
the god ...
What is it that the king, my lord, commands?
Concerning the Arameans about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why have you not written to me about them?" — now then I am writing to the king, my lord: they are in my presence. I have captured them and am herewith sending them to the king, my lord.
... we shall perform
... 20 hectares ...
... Assyria
You place an eating-bowl before the Anunnaki gods, make a flour/incense-offering, pour oil, honey, beer and wine, and sing, “Lead me, Great Lords.” You place an eating-bowl, pour oil, honey, beer and wine, and sing, “Lead me, Great Lords.”
On my second campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me and I marched to the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians, who since time immemorial had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors. In the high mountains, difficult terrain, I rode on horseback and had my personal chariot carried on (men’s) necks. In very rugged terrain I roamed about on foot like a wild bull.
Witness Šamaš-šallim, chariot fighter.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
... concerning ...
Witness Aššur-...
I carried off (all these things) as substantial booty (and) brought (them) to my city Aššur.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint,
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial payment from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
... the watch ...
... I brought to my city Aššur. I made (them) take an oath by the great gods and I imposed upon them tribute and payment. I received horses, mules, Bactrian camels, oxen, and sheep and goats as their annual giving.
The king, my lord, should send word that they should be shown a house in Nineveh, and that they should be allowed to stay there. They should not be exposed to the sun, and they should not be exposed to cold.
4 litres of honey ...
Witness Silim-Aššur, horse trainer.
... mu
The king of Elam heard about the advance of my expeditionary force, and fear fell upon him. He sent his officials to inquire about my well-being, and they kissed my feet.
From Rašil the older, servant of the king.
Total, the offerings of the chief eunuch.
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... to Bel-šep-...
130 ...
“You, the divine lady of ladies, the goddess of war, the lady of battle, the lady of strife, the lady of combat, the lady of the great gods, the lady of the lands, the lady of all princes, the lady of all rulers, the lady of all lords, the lady of all kings, the lady of the crown, the lady of the scepter, the lady of the throne, the lady of the reign, the lady of the dynasty, the lady of the lineage, the lady of the house of succession, the lady of the temple, the lady
When the king, my lord, sent me to the land of Akkad, I went and stayed two days in the presence of the king, my lord. The king, my lord, gave me orders as follows:
Month Adar (XII), 7th day, eponym year of Abi-ram, grand vizier.
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur.
as I heard ...
A tablet of Bel-bani to the palace scribe.
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired.
The stone weight is 10 minas. Whoever in the future, at any time,
Concerning the news of the king of Elam about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why have you not written to me what it is?" — I have now written to the king, my lord, what I have heard.
... Elamite
Tribute from the land of the Šubaru.
you do not know ...
Shalmaneser, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (I), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of Aššur:
To the king, my lord: your servant, Nadin-Ea. Good health to the king, my lord. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord. May they give the king, my lord, long days and everlasting years.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, changed or altered the proceedings, or jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
the woman NN, his maid, ... ;
... I built (and) completed ... from its foundations to its crenellations... I made (it) greater than before... I made (it) more outstanding than before... I made (it) more glorious than before... I made (it) more splendid than before...
Seal of Aššur-bēl-kaʾʾin, chief singer of the city of Kalḫu, owner of the vineyard being sold.
he is ...
... their ... s
... the king ...
The governor of ... has brought 200 men ... and is  bringing them to the king, my lord. The men are ... ; they are not  able to do the work.
... he will kill ...
Disregard that ... they will kill, plunder, and loot ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... the river ... ; why did you not write to me?"
Your servant Nabû-bel-šumate: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: I have sent my messenger to greet the king, the horses and the soldiers.
I have now written to the king, my lord; let the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
... of the land of Akkad
Tablet of Aššur-zeru-ibni to Nergal-eṭir. Good health to my brother!
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord!
x hectares of field in the village of the vizier, adjoining the field of Aplaya, adjoining the field of Aššur-belu-taqqin,
At that time, Nabopolassar, king of Babylon, the one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, the one who renovates the cult centers of the great gods, the one who makes sattukku-offerings abundant, the one who provides for the sanctuaries of the great gods, the one who makes gifts splendid, the one who provides for the shrines of the great gods, the one who makes sattukku-offerings plentiful, the one who provides for the sanctuaries of the great gods, the one who makes gifts splend
... the king, my lord
Witness Basnî, scribe.
... the men who were taken away
of ...
... the river Uqnû ...
The messenger of the son of Yakin ...
Month ... , 1st day, eponym year of Sin-šarru-ibni.
(As for) Azūri of the land Ashdod, who had not bowed down to my yoke, I forcibly removed the gods of his father’s house, himself, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his brothers, (and other) offspring of his father’s house and took him to Assyria. I set Šēp-šarri, his son, over the people of the land Ashdod and imposed upon him the payment of tribute (and) gifts (in recognition) of my overlordship so that he (now) pulls my yoke.
I have heard that the governor of Arrapha has written to the son of Nabû-ušallim: "Let me give you the Arabs." I have heard that he has given 100 Arabs to the son of Nabû-ušallim. I have also heard that the governor of Arrapha has given 100 Arabs to the son of Nabû-ušallim. I have heard that the governor of Arrapha has given 100 Arabs to the son of Nabû-ušallim.
in the temple of DN ...
... me ...
they say
I have written to the commander-in-chief; if he orders, I shall send the people to him.
O Marduk, the Enlil of the gods, the one who directs the Igīgū- and Anunnakū-gods, the one who controls the fates, the one who makes the foundation of the land firm, the one who establishes the ground-plan of heaven and netherworld, the one who dwells in Esagil, the great lord, his lord:
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Ilu-ereš or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or his prefect or his cohort commander or his neighbour or his relative or his labour-duty superior, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Aššur-naṣir, his sons and his grandsons,
Your servant Ina-tešî-eṭir: I would gladly die for the king of the lands, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king of the lands, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
Concerning the ...
... is present. The 'strength' ...
The king, my lord, can be glad.
In the future, may one of my descendants, when that temple becomes old and dilapidated, restore it. May he anoint with oil my monumental inscriptions, make sacrifices, (and) return (them) to their places. (Then) the goddess Ištar will listen to his prayers.
Duʾūzu (IV), the ... day, eponymy of ... , governor of the city ...
... the equipment of ...
to ...
10 ditto, the harem manageress of ... ;
... the day that Nabû-belu-ka''in
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether NN or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or his prefect or any relative of his,
Witness Nabû-rehtu-uṣur, ...
I have now written to Aššur-ahu-iddina; he will bring the logs to me, and I shall bring them to the king. The logs which he brought last year were many; I have brought down many more.
... to me
Witness NN, scribe.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... the son of the prelate
To the king, my lord: your servant, the chief eunuch. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord. May the gods of heaven and earth keep the king, my lord, alive.
I am your god, I am your lord ...
Total, 52 — the town of Hubaba.
... s, 30 sheep ...
I shall send ...
To the governor, my lord: your servant Nabû-duru-uṣur. Good health to the governor, my lord!
... I have written to you ...
... Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord.
Witness NN, scribe.
In the future, in distant days, may a later prince, when that palace becomes old and dilapidated, restore it. May he anoint with oil my monumental inscriptions, make sacrifices, (and) return (them) to their places. (Then) the goddess Ištar will listen to his prayers.
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
Aššur-uballiṭ, king of the universe, overseer, son of Erība-Adad (I), king of Assyria, overseer, son of Aššur-bēl-nišēšu (I) (who was) also overseer:
Two sons of Nabû-aplu-iddina, ... , one son of NN, ... , one son of NN, ... , one son of NN, ... , one son of NN, ... , one son of NN, ... , one son of NN, ... , one son of NN, ... , one son of NN, ... , one son of NN, ... , one son of NN, ... , one son of NN, ... , one son of NN, ... , one son of NN, ... , one son of NN, ... , one
... to the city ...
In the future may a later prince, when that wall becomes old and dilapidated, restore it. May he restore my inscribed name and my monumental inscriptions to their places. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers. May he restore my clay inscriptions to their places. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
I took the road in pursuit of Tanutamon (and) I marched as far as the city Thebes, his fortified city. He saw the assault of my battle array and abandoned the city Thebes; he fled to the city Kipkipi. With the support of the god Aššur, my lord, I conquered that city (Thebes) in its entirety. I carried off his wife, his sons, his daughters, his possessions, (and) his property.
... s in the house of ...
... the king, my lord
... I will do
If a snake keeps scaring people in a temple: the offerings of that temple will continue.
... the king, my lord ...
to NN ...
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
Witness ... -šallim, son of Gabbî.
... the land Bīt-Ḫumria (Israel) ... I brought out ... (5') ... I placed ... in the hands of ... , a servant who belonged to me, and ... I gave ... to ...
1, the commander-in-chief of the ... ;
... is placed before Šamaš. The 'cap' rides upon the 'outside.'
Witness Kenu-lešir, ditto.
I enlarged the site of Nineveh, my capital city. I broadened its squares and brought light into the alleys and streets, making (them) as bright as day.
Aššur-ilaya,
cure of ...
1, (ditto) of the meal;
... to the town of Ša-la-mašê ...
It shall increase by a fourth.
Witness Aššur-le'i, ...
Nabû-ila'i, chief ... ;
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, wise prince, circumspect ruler, shepherd of the people, (and) leader of a widespread population, I:
x+4 talents of red wool, 100 talents of black wool, 100 talents of alum, 100 talents of natron.
saying: "... the merchants ... to the king, my lord ...
For the goddess Ištar, august lady, who loves Assyria, who dwells in Eanna, which is inside Uruk, the lady of Uruk, his lady: Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer (and) Akkad, (re)constructed Eanna, her beloved temple.
Your servant Nergal-eṭir: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
Month Kislev (IX), 3rd day, eponym year of Sin-šarru-uṣur.
Witness ... -zeru-iddina, palace manager.
5 cans of beer;
The gods Ninurta and Nergal, who love my priesthood, gave to me the wild beasts and commanded me to hunt. I killed 300 lions from my ... chariot with my wildly outstanding assault with the spear. I killed 200 ostriches like caged birds with the spear. I killed 100 ostriches with the spear from my ... chariot. I killed 100 ostriches with the spear from my ... chariot. I killed 100 ostriches with the spear from my ... char
I have written to the ... ; they are bringing the ... to me.
At that time, the temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, my mistress, which Ilu-šumma, my forefather, the prince, had previously built — that temple had become dilapidated and old. I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I rebuilt (it) from top to bottom. I made it larger than before. I built inside it a lofty dais (and) an awesome sanctuary for the abode of the goddess Ištar, my mistress. I deposited my monumental inscription.
... the city of Akkad, which had rebelled against you, ... you have conquered.
... of Aššur
... 24 cavalrymen, cohort commander of the ...
Witness Remanni-Adad, servant.
from Dur-Šarruken.
3 ditto of chick-peas;
Concerning Aššur-da''in-šarru, ...
Witness Inurta-šarru-uṣur, 'third man.'
... is in his charge.
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods:
I have given out the bread and water rations that were in the storehouse.
in the city of Assur, the great cult center, ... the great lord, my lord, ...
Bel-na'id, the son of the governor of Bit-Bunakki, a servant of the king, my lord, who is in the service of Nabû-... , the palace superintendent, has come to me, saying: "The king, my lord, has sent me to you, saying: 'Speak with Nabû-... , and let him give you the people of Bit-Bunakki who are in his charge.'"
... which are in the city of Dur-Šarruken, ... , the ... of the city of Dur-Šarruken, and the ... of the city of Dur-Šarruken —
before the gods ...
Now then I am writing to the king, my lord: let the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
3 ...
In the top of the right surface of the 'finger' there is a 'weapon'-mark. The base of the middle part is 'loose.'
1, prefect of the cavalry;
The forts and the land of the king, my lord, are well.
Yasubaya, the ... , has written to me:
The king, my lord, should send word that they should be shown a house in Nineveh, and they should live there. They should not live in the city of the palace herald.
Witness Pan-Issar-lamur.
... the commander-in-chief ...
The temple of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, which Ilu-šumma, my forefather, had previously built — that temple had become dilapidated and I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I rebuilt it from top to bottom. I made it larger than before. I roofed it with magnificent cedar beams. I fastened band(s) of silver on doors of cypress (and) white cedar and I fixed (them) in its gateways.
Witness Nabû-eriba, deputy of the team-commander.
You shall not do (anything) that is evil and improper to Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, or to his sons, grandsons, brothers and nephews, or to his prefect, or to any of his magnates, governors or eunuchs, or to any of the bearded (officials) or to any of the eunuchs, or to any of the Assyrian or foreign troops, or to any of the horses or mules, or to any of the equipment,
The goddess Ištar, who resides in the city Arbela, who is clothed in fire (and) clothed in awe-inspiring radiance, who is clothed in awe-inspiring splendor, who is clothed in awe-inspiring radiance, who is clothed in awe-inspiring radiance, who is clothed in awe-inspiring radiance, who is clothed in awe-inspiring radiance, who is clothed in awe-inspiring rad
The king, my lord, knows that the city of Akkad is under the authority of the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should know that the king of Elam ...
From this day, the 10th day of this month, the month ... of this year, to the ... th day of the month ... of this year, for 30 days and nights, my stipulated term —
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, ...
Witness Basnî, servant of ...
which I/he/they ...
Written according to the original and collated.
... of the men who were deported
... s of gold ...
An estate of 100 (hectares of) land in the town of ...
The rest of the tribute I received from Nabû-šuma-iškun, the governor of ... , and from Bel-lu-balaṭ, the governor of Bit-Barrû.
... I will not let you live. I will not allow you to stand before your enemy. I will not let you stand before your enemy. I will not allow you to stand before your enemy.
The 11th day: at court, favourable.
1, the woman Gadiâ;
If he does not pay, it shall increase by a fourth.
Month ... , xth day, eponym year of Mannu-ki-... , treasurer.
81,000 stalks of vine; 3 orchards; 3 vegetable gardens; 1 house; 1 threshing floor; 1 garden; 1 well; 1 cistern for water.
3 2-seah jars of hinhinu-seeds;
his sons ...
... as the king ...
Month Shebat (XI), 1st day, eponym year of Zazaya.
1, Ištar of Arbela, the lady of battle;
... the one who performs the work of the goddesses ...
... his ... and his city ...
Should Assurbanipal, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, strive and plan? Should he send Nabû-šarru-uṣur, rab mūgi, to Ikkalû, king of Elam, and should he go?
Witness Nabû-šumu-iddina.
I put to the sword the population of the city Ḫirimmu, a dangerous enemy, and I did not spare a single one. I hung their corpses on poles and placed (them) around the city. I reorganized that district (and) imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the gods of Assyria, my lords.
I have written to the treasurer, but he has not yet sent me the horses.
... to me
Month of Adar (XII), 18th day.
The barley has been piled up, (but) the king, my lord, has given me no orders.
... to the land of Akkad ... the king, my lord, sent me. I went and spoke with the king, my lord, and the king, my lord, said to me: "Go and speak with the magnates who are there, and let them write to me." I went and spoke with them, and they wrote to the king, my lord: "The men who went to the king, my lord, are servants of the king, my lord."
Puhî;
... ;
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
... adjoining the road that leads to ...
... wooden ...
these ...
... and the rest of the tribute
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether Assurbanipal, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, should send Nabû-šarru-uṣur, rab mūgi, to Egypt,
Nabû-... , ... of the goddess Ištar
May Palil, the foremost lord, smash your bow in the thick of battle.
total 4 ...
... in my presence ...
adjoining the field of Ša-Aššur-dubbu,
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. The best of health to the king, my lord!
The land of Raši is well; the forts of the king, my lord, are well. The king, my lord, can be glad.
The ... of the land ... , the ... of the land ... , the land Bīt-Ḫumria (Israel), the land Judah, the land Ammon, the land Moab, the land ... , the land Ashkelon, the land Gaza, the land ... , the land Bīt-Ammon, the land Qedar, the land ... , the land Bīt-Amukāni, the land Bīt-Dakkūri, the land Bīt-Kapsi, the land Bīt-Imbiya, the
Now ...
9, the cupbearer(s);
Concerning the chariot owners about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me, I have sent two chariot owners to the king, my lord. They are now waiting for the horses.
1, the physicians,
... will say ...
2 homers of roasted grain;
To the governor of Arrapha, my lord: your servant, Dadî. Good health to my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless my lord. May the great gods ...
shall place x minas of refined silver (and) x minas of pure gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
35 homers of wine, the chief singer;
of 1,230 ...
1 mina, Nabû-... ;
40, Hubtu;
The king, my lord, knows that the men of the king are  coming to me. I have sent my messenger to them, saying: "Come, let me  review you, and let me give you orders." They have not agreed to come.
To the vizier, my lord: your servant Nabû-zeru-iqiša. Good health to the vizier, my lord!
Witness Ilu-le'i.
5 sheep, 5 spring lambs, 10 jars of wine, 10 (containers of) dates, 10 (containers of) figs, 10 (containers of) pomegranates,
... the ... which
... the chariot of ...
The charge of the rear palace is doing very well; the king, my lord, can be happy. May Aššur, Šamaš, Bel and Nabû give the king, my lord, long days and everlasting years!
To the king, my lord: your servant Mahdê. Good health to the king, my lord!
Arzezu,
or in ...
Witness Zababa-eriba, 'third man.'
in ...
... I have sent ... to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, ask ...
Aššur, the great lord, ...
... Witness NN.
... the farmer of ... , the town of Abi-ul-idi
... "the son of Rimutu
... the army of ...
... in their midst
... the governor(s)
... their ... s ...
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... the temple of Ea
... the land of Akkad
... of Nabû-šallim, the ...
... the god Aššur ... the god Aššur ... the god Aššur ... to Assyria ... the gods of the lands ... I brought out and ...
When the king, my lord, ... the town of Til-šikari, the men
... this
... to the Babylonians
1 ditto of fish;
I have heard that the king, my lord, is angry with me.
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, then I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, fortified cities, together with the small(er) settlements in their environs (and) the district of the land Bīt-Barrû in its entirety, and I added (this area)
Ammon
If a planet becomes visible in Elul (VI): the king of the Westland will die.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
... the governors
... the 'outside' rides upon the 'cap.'
... the land of Arbela
... , 4 minas, 4 shekels, the palace;
a cup of ... ;
... to the king, my lord, ...
... Iau-bi'dî
10 shekels of silver belonging to Ahu'a-amur, at the disposal of Nadinu.
... ayu, owner of the man.
Month of the goddess Bēlat-ekallim, eponymy of Atar-ili, governor of the city Carchemish (673 BC).
10 minas of silver ... ;
... I gave to NN, the ... of the god Marduk, as a gift.
... the town of ... , the town of ... , the town of ... , the town of ... , the town of ... , the town of ... , the town of ... , the town of ... , the town of ... , the town of ... , the town of ... , the town of ... , the town of ... , the town of ... , the town of ... , the town of ... , the town of ... , the town of ... , the town of ... , the town of ... , the town of ... , the town of ... , the town of ... , the town of ... , the town of ... , the town
... the king, my lord, ...
Witness Haldi-ahu-uṣur, horse trainer of the royal bodyguard.
Your servant Sasî: I would gladly die for the palace scribe, my lord! Say to the palace scribe, my lord:
I had a stele made, had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, written on it, and I erected (it) in (that) city. I had a royal image of myself expressing humility (lit. “one who strokes the nose”) placed before the god Aššur, my lord, and I offered pure sacrifices to the god Aššur, my lord.
... Sagabu, son of Nabû-ahu-...
which Mukin-zeri ...
... in the middle of the city of Assur, on the right and left, in front and behind, in the middle of the city wall, in the moat of the city wall ...
in the days ...
... he is not a good man
I conquered the land Bīt-Ḫumria (Israel) in its entirety (and) I brought to Assyria Ša-Nabû-šû, their king, together with his family, his fighting men, (and) the booty of his land.
The guard of my lord is very strong.
From Nabû-iqbi.
... 2 oxen, 10 sheep, 10 spring lambs,
... the Hittite(s) ...
NN, his wife, his son, his daughter,
Witness Aššur-le'i, 'third man.'
Issar-... , ... ;
The king, my lord, should know that the crown prince is very well indeed. He has fully recovered. Aššur and my gods have blessed the crown prince, my lord.
Ilu-eriba,
... Se'-abu-...
The money is paid completely. That field is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
That which is (written) upon the throne at the foot of the bed.
wooden ...
... Now then
... the king, my lord
... one ditto — Barzibutu
... the ... of the land ...
1 male sheep, 1 lamb of the ...
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
The king should not say: "Why did he not write?"
Sasî, ditto; Mannu-... , ... ;
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the city Ṣiṣṣirtu, a fortress of Harhar, which is located on the border of Ellipi, and (which) the Manneans captured and took possession of,
... house ...
At the beginning of my kingship, in my first year, when the god Aššur, my lord, entrusted me with the lordship of the lands, the people of the land of the Qutu, the land of the Uqumanu, the land of the Papḫu, the land of the Šubaru, the land of the Sutu, the land of the Ubulu, the land of the Malaḫu, the land of the Rapiqu, the land of the Ḫabḫu, the land of the Nabatu, the land of the G
On the ... th day, when Bel-le'i came, I said to him: "... to the palace. Let the king, my lord, ask ... whether I have not given ... to the palace."
... seah of 8 'litres'
At that time, the palace of my royal residence, which is in the city Tarbiṣu, which a former king had had built and whose construction he had carried out correctly, but whose construction he had carried out inexpertly — its walls had buckled, its bondings had disintegrated, its superstructure had become weak, its foundation had collapsed, its brickwork had fallen apart, its ... had become loose, its ... had been destroyed, its ... had been abandoned, its ... had been heaped up, its ... had become a heap of ruins, its ... had been piled up, its ...
Disregard that ...
I have heard that the Hubuškian has come out of the pass of Hubuškia and is on his way to the king, my lord.
I and ...
As to what you wrote: "The king of Elam has written to us, saying: 'The king of Assyria has sent a messenger to me, saying: "The governor of Arrapha has come to me, saying: 'The king of Assyria has sent me a message, saying: "The governor of Arrapha has come to me, saying: "The king of Elam has written to me, saying: 'The governor of Arrapha has come to me, saying: "The king of Assyria has sent me a message, saying: "The governor of Arrapha
(whether) they will kill what there is to kill, plunder what there is to plunder, and loot what there is to loot.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
... the king, my lord, wrote ...
The town of Bit-Dakuru ...
... I carried off ... I brought out ... and I counted (them) as booty... I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire ... I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire ... I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire ...
... to the river
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did you not write to me before?" I have been ill; I did not write to the king, my lord, because of my illness. Now I have recovered and am well. I have written to the king, my lord, only now. The king, my lord, should not say: "Why did you not write to me?"
... the guard of his city
There is a hole in the middle of the 'station.' The left of the gall bladder is attached.
x minas of silver belonging to Aššur-aplu-iddina, at the disposal of Hiriṣayu.
(As for) the people of the land Ḫilakku, who had rebelled (and) sided with Šamaš-šumu-ukin, (my) unfaithful brother, I brought about their defeat. I captured Šamaš-šumu-ukin, their king, (and) flayed him in Nineveh, my capital city. I conquered the city Ḫirimmu, his royal city, (and) carried off 20,000 people, together with their possessions, (and) their gods.
Witness Nabû-šumu-iškun, chariot driver.
... I have sent ...
The report on Urarṭu is still the same. They have not advanced (but) are still there.
Total 589 horses, 7 mules.
The palace of Amēl-Marduk, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Babylon, king of Sumer (and) Akkad, son of Nebuchadnezzar (II), king of Babylon.
Assurbanipal, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, overseer; son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, overseer; son of Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, likewise overseer.
If Venus is red: there will be plenty for the people.
I sent my messenger to the king of the land Elam, but he detained the eunuch of mine whom I had sent (Marduk-šarru-uṣur) and did not give a reply to my word(s). (As for) the people of the land Bīt-Yakīn, who had sided with the king of the land Elam, they saw the deeds that the father who had engendered me had done to them and they became frightened.
I have written to you ...
14 ... ;
Nabû-šar-ahhešu;
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, scribe.
... I sent my eunuch, the provincial governor of the land Naʾiri, with them. They went and captured the city ... , the royal city of the land Ḫabḫu. They carried off ... , together with their property, and brought (it) to me.
Now, if it is agreeable to the king, my lord, let them write to me, and I shall do as the king, my lord, commands.
Ikūnum, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Erišum (I), vice-regent of Aššur:
8 'litres' ... ;
The Urarṭian has written to me: "The troops of the Manneans have been defeated on their expedition against the Cimmerians.
(                ) 4 big loaves;
Moreover, I, Ashurbanipal, ... , the creation of (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar, ... , the one who is clothed in splendor, ... , the one who is clothed in awe-inspiring radiance, ... , the one who is clothed in awe-inspiring radiance, ... , the one who is clothed in awe-inspiring radiance, ... , the one who is clothed in awe-inspiring radiance, ... , the one who is clot
the land of the Arabs ...
I marched to the land Ḫabḫu. I conquered the city Ḫarḫar, the fortified city of Ḫabḫu. I brought out of it people, horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty. I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire that city. I turned (it) into a mound of ruins (lit. “a mound and ruins”). I carried off to Assyria Ḫabḫu
Concerning the bull colossi of ... , I have sent 200 bull colossi to the river bank, and they are working on them.
To the king, my lord: your servant Adad-šumu-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
The king, my lord, should send word that they should be shown a house in Nineveh and live there, and I and my brothers should come and live with them. The king, my lord, should give orders that they should be given bread and fodder, and that they should be shown a house in Nineveh and live there, and I and my brothers should come and live with them. The king, my lord, should give orders that they should be shown a house in Nineveh and live there, and I and my brothers should come and live with them. The king, my lord, should give
1 ditto, the New Palace;
... of Assyria ...
Witness Mannu-ki-Ninua, ...
... Now then
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether these men or their sons or their grandsons or their brothers or any relative of theirs, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Šumma-ilani and his sons,
Witness Nabû-šallimšunu.
news of ...
(As for) him, Ummanaldašu (Ḫumban-ḫaltaš III), the king of the land Elam, along with the king of Babylon (and) the sheikhs of Chaldea who marched at his side, terror of doing battle with me overwhelmed them like alû-demons. They abandoned their tents and, in order to save their lives, they trampled the corpses of their troops as they pushed on.
from the town of ...
To the goddess Ištar, the lady of battle who loves my priestly service, the one who goes at my side, the one who ... my ... , the one who ... my ... , the one who ... my ... , the one who ... my ... , the one who ... my ... , the one who ... my ... , the one who ... my ... , the one who ... my ... , the one who ... my ... , the one who ... my ... , the one who ... my ... , the one who ... my ... , the one who ... my ... , the one who ... my ... , the one who
On the 27th day the king goes down to the House of God.
... If the moon is surrounded by a halo, and Cancer stands in it: the king of Akkad will extend the life.
To the king of the lands, my lord: your servant Bel-ušezib. May Bel, Nabû and Šamaš bless the king, my lord!
... Marduk-šumu-uṣur, ...
... of the river ...
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
The messenger of the city-lord of ... has come to me, saying: "The magnates of the king have gone to the house of the magnates of the house of the queen."
scribe.
... goes
I have heard that the king, my lord, is angry with me. I have been treated as if I did not keep the watch of the king, my lord. I have been treated as if I did not go to the campaign with the king, my lord. I have been treated as if I did not come back from the campaign with the king, my lord. I have been treated as if I did not keep the watch of the king, my lord.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Total, 70, in the town of Til-abnâ.
Disregard that the day is overcast and it is raining...
the men ...
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
... Ištar ...
Nabû-šarru-uṣur, in all 3 ...
Seal of Nabû-šumu-uṣur, son of Marduk-aplu-iddina,
If Venus disappears in the east in Nisan (I) from the 1st to the 30th day: the enemy will ... the land of Akkad ...
If in the month of your watch the sun rises in the path of the Anu stars: there will be truth in the land; the son will speak the truth with his father.
... I will guard
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
(and) the son of Ahu-iddina, son of Ahu-... , ...
Anu, Illil, Ea, Belet-ili, Damkina, Ninurta, Nusku, and Mandanu, the great gods, who decree destinies, who make great the sovereignty of Ashurbanipal, king of Assyria.
Hanubuni,
200, the cupbearer(s);
Witness ...
... the face ...
... the lord of ...
... the gardener of the vineyard ...
If on the 14th day the moon and sun are seen together: the king will be shut up in his palace for the length of a month; the step of the enemy will be set towards his land; the enemy will march around victoriously in his land.
If a planet rises in the path of the Anu stars: the king of the Westland will exercise world rule.
The palace of Aššur-bēl-kala ...
... his people
May Sin, the brightness of heaven and earth, clothe you in leprosy and forbid your entering into temple and palace.
10 hectares, the town of ... ;
Sa'iru, his servant —
... to the town of Abi-duri
— Jupiter stands in the halo of the moon.
From Bulluṭu.
Kanunayu, servant of the Assyrian,
... killed ...
with ...
I pursued him to the land Guzummānu and ordered my warriors into the midst of swamps and marshes. For five days they searched (for him), but his (hiding) place could not be found. (... ) I gathered together the rest of his horses and troops, who were weary (and) who had fled like deer instead of going with him, from the midst of the open country.
... , x hectares of field in the meadow of the crown prince, ...
2, the scribes of the governor of Nineveh;
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, have changed or altered the proceedings, or jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, king of kings, lord of lords, ruler of rulers, prince, lord of all, conqueror of the rebellious — those who do not submit to him (and) who are hostile to the god Aššur—, defeater of the princes of the Qutu as far as the land Meḫru, disperser of the forces of the land of the Šubaru and the remote lands Nairi as far as the border of Makan, strong king, capable
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also great king, strong king, king of the world, (and) king of Assyria; valiant man who acts with the support of Aššur, his lord, and has no rival among the princes of the four quarters, marvelous she
... The king, my lord, should send word that they should be shown a house in Nineveh and live there, and I and my brother should come and stay with them, until the king, my lord, sends word that we should return to our homes.
The village of Halabayu, son of Ilu-ibni.
... Ṣillaya
The commander-in-chief will provide the food for the wedding night of Mullissu.
The 1st day we let pass by ...
Month Tammuz (IV), 22nd day, eponym year of Ilu-isse'a.
Month ... , 8th day, eponym year of Aššur-bani (713 B.C.).
Total 88 men ...
I received tribute from Qarparunda, the Patinean: silver, gold, tin, bronze, bronze tubs, bronze pails, bronze bowls, bronze linen garments with multi-colored trim, linen garments of byssus, linen garments of wool, a bronze bath-tub, a bronze cauldron, a bronze washbasin, bronze asallu-bowls, bronze diqāru-pots, bronze pails, bronze bowls, bronze linen garments with multi-colored trim, linen garments of byssus, l
Witness Sin-ašared. Witness Kiṣir-Aššur.
The 'third men' of the chariot troops have come to me, saying: "The  king's chariot troops have been assembled, but the governor of Calah has  withheld the chariot troops from us."
The base of the middle 'finger' of the lung is 'bound.' The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
... I said: "Why ...
1 woman, 1 daughter of 4 spans, 3 maids,
I shall do ...
... to his ...
The servants of the king, my lord, are well.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, (or) changed or altered the proceedings...
and the Chaldeans ...
... is good
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ahhe-eriba. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
La-qepu, ... ;
... ,
I will go and speak with the ... , and shall return and speak with the chief eunuch.
The men of the king of Elam ... have come to the city of ... , saying: "The king of Assyria has sent us to the city of ... "
Witness Banî. Witness Urda-Nanaya.
... the 7th day, the 8th day, the 9th day ...
The goddess Ištar, mistress of the lands, ... , who loves my priestly service, gave to me as a gift a just scepter, a strong bow, (and) a mighty arrow, the slayer of the disobedient; she placed in my hand the rod and ring, the insignia of my lordship, (and) allowed me to achieve my heart’s desire. She allowed me to stand over my enemies in victory (and) triumph, ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šarru-emuranni. Good health to the king, my lord!
... the commandant
Basnî ...
and the Chaldeans ...
Witness NN.
... the king, my lord
Witness Ibašši-ilani.
... of bronze
The king, my lord, ...
Urdî, son of Ahu-duri, gardener; 1 woman; 1 daughter, of 4 spans' height; 1, of 3 spans' height: a total of 5 people.
I placed Bēl-ibni, a son of a rab banî (and) a scion of Šuanna (Babylon) on his royal throne (and) entrusted him with the people of the land of Akkad. I appointed my eunuchs to be governors over all of the districts of Chaldea and I imposed the yoke of my lordship upon them. (vii 10') I conquered the city Nagītu, which is in the midst of the sea, (and) I carried off its booty. I placed Nabû-š
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Zarutî or his son or his grandson, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Mannu-ki-Arbail,
I placed at their service ramku-priests, pašīšu-priests, ecstatics, those initiated in secret rites, purification priests, āšipu-priests, lamentation priests, (and) singers, who have mastered (their) entire craft. I set before them purification priests, āšipu-priests, lamentation priests, (and) singers, who have mastered (their) entire craft.
... three ...
An estate of 1 hectare of land in the town of Sairi, adjoining Bel-ibni and Bel-ibni-aplu-iddina —
Concerning the crown prince about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me, I have heard it; we shall see what there is to it and write to the king, my lord.
20 hectares of arable land, 10 hectares under cultivation therein.
... the mule express
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord!
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "...
... the Chaldean(s) ...
... he has taken away the ... of my fathers
Ea, Belet-ili, Damkina, Ninurta, Nusku, and Mandanu.
... to their places ...
Concerning the king my lord's order: "1,000 (homers) of barley should be delivered to the people of Babylon; the rest of the barley should be stored in Dur-Šarruken" — the barley has been delivered to the people of Babylon, and the king my lord's order has been fulfilled. The king, my lord, can be glad.
I have given the order to Bel-le'i: "Release the boats!"
of the palace of the king ...
Adad-nerari (III), king of the universe, king of Assyria, overseer, son of Šamši-Adad (V), king of the universe, king of Assyria, overseer, son of Shalmaneser (III), king of the four quarters:
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
From Rašil the older, servant of the king.
All this from the 10th day.
Total 101 — (governor of) Que.
until ...
... his ... s, the king ...
all that ...
... of silver on ...
... to the king, my lord
From Balasî.
... to the king
... to me
1 writing-board ...
The herald shall not call him to account.
When the king, my lord, sent me to the land of Raši, I captured the city of Ḫindānu, the fortified city of Raši, and brought (it) under the control of the palace.
... he did not come ... I sent my servants to him, but they did not come back.
the men of ...
... the king ... the work
... he has sent ... to ...
The 'strength' is absent ...
The chariot of the king of Assyria is in the charge of Aššur-mukin-paleya.
When the king of Elam heard of the conquest of his cities, he became very afraid, and ... he went up into the mountains.
... against us
As to the house of Aššur-šallim-ahhe about which the king wrote to me, I have brought the son of Aššur-šallim-ahhe into the Inner City.
(But) as for me, Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, the performing of this work came to my attention by the will of the gods and I put my mind to it. I forcibly removed the people of Chaldea, Aramean (tribes), the land of the Manneans, (and) the lands Que and Ḫilakku, who had not submitted to my yoke, then I made them carry baskets (of earth) and they made bricks.
Witness Aššur-reṣuwa, eunuch, recruitment officer of the palace.
... this ...
... I am herewith sending him to the king, my lord.
... the 'hand' of god ...
of ...
Witness Šamaš-šarru-ibni.
To the god Aššur, his lord: Sargon (II), presented (this object) for the sake of his life.
and Nabû-šezib ...
If a meteor flashes from the east and sets in the west: the main army of the enemy will fall.
the messenger of ...
I built a city in the steppe for the goddess Ištar, my mistress, and named it Kār-Ištar. I settled the people of the lands that I had conquered therein.
... the palace ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
When the king, my lord, sent me to the Palace, I saw the king, my lord, and kissed the ground before the king, my lord.
A tablet of NN to the king, his lord. Good health to the king, my lord! The city of Der and the fort are well.
He said: "Nabû-aplu-iddina ...
NN, farmer, and his people in the village of ... , in the district of the town Ša-Ṣillaya.
Witness Zarutî, cohort commander.
Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-Baladan) ...
... the horse-trainers of the crown prince
Witness Abdi-Dadi, ...
I built a palace of breccia, alabaster, elephant ivory, ebony, boxwood, musukkannu-wood, cedar, cypress, juniper, and elammaku-wood, for my lordly residence.
The king of Babylon has written to me: "The son of Yakin has come to Babylon. I have asked him about the Arameans, and he told me this:
Month Tishri (VII), ... th day, eponym year of Nabû-ahu-uṣur.
Bel-ereš, who is in your charge, has not come to me.
I am the Great Lady; I am Ištar of Arbela. I am the Lady of Nineveh, the lady of the lands. I am the queen of the gods, the lady of the goddesses.
Witness Aplî.
The priest of Aššur circumambulated the House of God and the temples. The ... s went out.
Witness Nabû-hamatua, village manager.
I have heard that the son of Nabû-belu-ka''in
Concerning the town of the bakers about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why have you taken it as a town for yourself?" — ... the town ...
... the scribe of the prefect
all the Gurreans ...
... and they are doing the work.
10 ... ;
... his ... s, his horse, his equipment ...
... the men
Ditto by Ištar of Arbela and Ištar of Nineveh!
I, the crown prince of the Succession Palace, who is now ill, and on whom the 'hand' of god Nanaya of Uruk is being 'placed' in extispicy — the 'hand' of god Nanaya of Uruk is being 'placed' in extispicy for me, and I am now ill — am (even) more ill than the king, my lord. I have no appetite, I have no strength, I have no energy, I have no life.
Witness Nabû-ahu-uṣur, servant of Bel-iqbi.
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The messengers of the king of Elam have come to us, saying: "...
If the sun rises and its light is red: the land will see plenty ...
Witness Nuhšaya, porter.
1 wooden ... , polished, (with) a setting of gold;
... the Mannean(s) ...
The palace of ... son of NN, the ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... ,
2 ... ;
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
As to what you wrote: "May the king, my lord, send word that they should be shown a house in Nineveh and live there, and may I come to the king, my lord, and serve the king, my lord, in person!" — why should you come to me in person? The king, my lord, knows that I am ill; I am not able to go out and receive the king's subjects who come to me. I am waiting for the king, my lord. As soon as the king, my lord, has recovered, I shall send word that you may come to me in person
(As for) Nabû-naʾid (and) Bēl-ēṭir, sons of Nabû-šuma-ēreš, the šandabakku (governor of Nippur), whose father, the one who had engendered them, had stirred up Urtaku to fight with the land Akkad — the bones of Nabû-šuma-ēreš, which they had taken out of the land Gambulu to Assyria, I made them (lit. “his sons”) crush those bones opposite the Citadel Gate of Nine
Bel-iqišanni,
Witness NN. Witness Barruqu.
I shall go and speak with them ...
Witness Ququ.
all ...
Concerning the chief of the ...
In the month of Tammuz (IV), eponym year of Sin-šumu-lešir.
total — the men from Assyria.
who ...
The people of the country are exempt.
The king, my lord, should know (this)...
A tablet of the palace scribe to the palace scribe.
I have now written to you; do not be negligent ...
Nabû-eriba, son of Šamaš-šumu-ukin, ...
Written according to the original and collated.
Total 23 horses,
Month Ab (V), 18th day, eponym year of ...
The king, my lord, knows that the son of Aššur-belu-uṣur is a servant of Nabû-šumu-iddina. He has been sold for money ...
... the men of the Itu'eans ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-šumu-ka''in. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Šamaš bless the king, my lord!
The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number.
You shall not make common cause with (any)one who may revolt against Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, concerning whom he has concluded (this) treaty with you, but, should they seize you by force, you shall flee and come to Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, and serve him.
I have now written to the palace. May the king do as he deems best.
1 ditto of pomegranates;
Tomorrow, in the evening, the king will perform the sheep offerings before Aššur and Mullissu. The ... s of the king will be present. The king will perform the sheep offerings before them. The king will perform the sheep offerings before the gods of heaven. The king will perform the sheep offerings before the gods of earth.
NN, ... ;
... within this stipulated term
And now, if the king, my lord, commands, I shall send the son of Yakin to the king, my lord, and let him speak with the king, my lord.
the men of ...
The king, my lord, should ask the chief scribe.
Nabû-šumu-iškun, scribe, keeper of the contract.
The name of the son of the priest of Bel is Šamaš-belu-uṣur.
... to my lord
... the house of his father ...
who ...
... I have sent ...
... who
Concerning the 60 sheep about which the king, my lord, wrote to me,
I brought out the auxiliary forces of the Arameans (and) Chaldeans who were in Uruk, Nippur, Kish, (and) Ḫursagkalama, together with the guilty citizens, and I counted (them) as booty.
I have heard that the king of Assyria has sent a letter to the son of Yakin, saying: "Let me see your face, come to my presence, and I will give you the land of Akkad." The son of Yakin has not agreed to come, saying: "I have not sold the land of Akkad for money." The king of Assyria has heard (this) and is saying: "He is a traitor, he does not obey me."
Witness Nabû-zeru-lešir, chief of accounts.
The money is paid completely. That field, house, threshing floor, garden and people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Witness ... , ... of the Inner City.
... the goddess Ištar, my mistress,
If the Old Man star comes close to the top of the moon and stands there: the days of the ruler will be long; there will be truth in the land.
... writing-board ...
their houses ...
... Aššur-šarru-uṣur
To the king, my lord: your servant Mannu-ki-Adad. Good health to the king, my lord!
... them
Concerning Bel-iddina about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... his ... s to the prefects!" —
Witness NN, 'third man.'
The king of Babylon, the king of the lands, the king of the four quarters, the one who fashioned the image of (the god) Aššur, the one who built Ebabbar, the one who renovated Esagil and Ezida, the one who completed the sanctuaries of the great gods, the one who returned the plundered gods of the lands to their (proper) place from Assyria, the one who made the cult centers shine, the one who organized well the forgotten rites of the great gods, the one who returned the plundered gods of the
(Ditto, ditto;) just as a caterpillar does not see and does not return to its cocoon, so may you not return to your women, your sons, and to your houses.
to the king, my lord ...
... the life of ...
Month ... , xth day, eponym year of Sagab (651).
the district ...
Seal of Šarru-... ,
Nabû-balassu-iqbi
... the ... s
I have written to the king, my lord, (about) the matter which I heard in the city of Akkad. The king, my lord, should know (this).
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... the village of Abi-lešir
the architect ...
Aplaya ... , Witness Ba...
... Šamaš, ... Anu
One haruspex shall sit by the side of the haruspex who is going to the oracle. The haruspex who goes to the oracle shall not sit (by him).
I am herewith sending to the king, my lord, the letter which I sent to the commander-in-chief. I have written to the commander-in-chief, but I have not heard an answer to my letter.
... the Itu'eans ... have entered there.
Disregard that ... they may think about it, but turn back ...
... the temple of the god Adad
Your servant NN: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! May Enlil, Ninurta, and Nusku bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
If the moon becomes visible in Sivan (III) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
Witness Nabû-naṣir, horse trainer of the palace.
The baker and the brewer shall have the usufruct of the intestines.
I sent Sanî, son of NN, to the Palace. He came back and told me: "The Palace has given orders to me to ... the ... of the Itu'eans."
He (Marduk-apla-iddina) heard about the advance of my expeditionary force, and fear fell upon him. He brought ... to Babylon and ... He made the Babylonians swear an oath by the great gods and ... He sent ... to Nabû-šuma-iškun, my official, and ... He wrote to me as follows: “Let the Babylonians ... with the men, horses, and army of Assyria that you have brought to Babylon, and let them ... with me. Let them ... with me ... ”
If the moon and sun are in opposition: the king of the land will widen his understanding.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
... the palace supervisor of the crown prince ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
I sent word, and they brought him to me. I asked him: "Why did you ... ?"
the forts ...
... the fort ...
1, Gagî, ... of the king;
Witness Šumma-ilani.
1 prayer bowl ditto;
Moreover, (as for) Ṣidqâ, the king of the city Ashkelon who had not bowed down to my yoke, I forcibly removed the gods of his father’s house, himself, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his brothers, (and other) offspring of his father’s house and took him to Assyria.
... to the king of the lands, my lord, ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
The king, my lord, should send (word) that they should bring me the bodyguard Ašaredu, the son of Nabû-ušallim, and the bodyguard Aššur-reṣuwa, so that I can question them. I have heard that they have been involved in a plot.
I have now written to the son of Yakin. If he comes, I shall send him to the Palace. If not, I shall write to the Palace that he should come.
5 talents, the land of Raṣappa;
I appointed over them Bēl-ibni, a son of a rab banî (and) a scion of Šuanna (Babylon) who had grown up like a young puppy in my palace, as king of the land of Sumer and Akkad.
I am Nabû-šumu-iddina, your servant and one who reveres you.
Month Iyyar (II), 1st day, eponym year of Kanunayu, governor of the New Palace.
(As for) the Cimmerians, a dangerous enemy who had never feared my ancestors, and, with regard to me, had not grasped the feet of my royal majesty, with the support of (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar, my lords, he (Gyges) clamped (them) in manacles, handcuffs, (and) neck-stocks and sent (them) before me, together with his substantial audience gift(s).
On my third campaign, I marched against Baʾalu, king of the land Tyre, who resides in the middle of the sea. Because he did not honor my royal command(s and) did not obey the pronouncement(s) from my lip(s), I set up outposts against him. To prevent his people from leaving, I reinforced (its) garrison. By sea and dry land, I took control of (all of) his routes (and thus) cut off (all) access to him. (ii 15) I made the people of the land Tyre,
... I will do
Month of Sîn (III), 30th day, eponym year of Ša-Adad-nīnu.
Witness Bel-abu'a.
If an eclipse ... : the king of the land will die, and there will be hostility in the land.
7 big loaves;
The city of Aššur, the great mountain, whose foundations are as firm as the mass of a mountain, whose walls are as strong as the base of a mountain,
The king of Elam sent 10 minas of silver and 10 minas of gold to Aššur-remanni, the son of the prelate of Der, and gave him as a gift.
At that time, the palace in the citadel of Nineveh, which Aššur-nādin-aḫḫē (II), my forefather, had previously built, became old and dilapidated. I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I rebuilt (it) from top to bottom. I made it larger than before. I built within it a room for my royal residence. I roofed it with magnificent cedar beams. I fastened bands of silver on doors of cypress (and) white cedar and I installed (them
... the Babylonians ...
The scribe of the palace herald has written to me: "The king, my lord, has given me orders concerning you.
I sent (word) and they brought him to me. I asked him: "Why did you not come?"
I have heard that you ...
Witness NN, royal bodyguard.
to the goddess Ištar ...
... the gods ... the king ... the king ...
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur, eunuch.
The king, my lord, should send a bodyguard to ... ; they should bring the ... s to me, and I will give them to the ... s.
The horses which he harnessed ...
Adad-apla-iddina, king of Babylon, the one who renovates Esagil and Ezida, the one who performs good deeds, the one who provides for the cult centers, the one who makes sattukku-offerings abundant, the one who provides for the sanctuaries, the one who makes nindabû-offerings plentiful, the one who provides for the sanctuaries of the land of Sumer and Akkad, the one who provides for the sanctuaries of the great gods, am I.
The king, my lord, should send word that they should be brought here.
The Itu'eans came to me in the Palace, saying: "The king has given us orders to go to the town of Šamaš-iqbi. We shall go ... "
... I settled ... in the land Hamath ... I imposed upon them ... tribute, payment(s), ... I imposed upon them ... I imposed upon them ... tribute, payment(s), ... I imposed upon them ...
Witness ... ayu.
In the future may a later prince, when that palace becomes old and dilapidated, restore it. May he anoint with oil my monumental inscriptions, make sacrifices, (and) return (them) to their places. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
To the goddess Ištar, his lady: Sargon (II), presented (this object) for the sake of his life.
Concerning the ritual about which the king, my lord, wrote to me, it is favourable to perform it. We shall perform it on the 14th day, in the evening. The king, my lord, should know (this).
Šamaš-kettu-...
The merchant who brought the (caravan) of 300 (donkeys) from the other side of the river, has come to me. I asked him about the news, and he told me this: "The Urarṭian has been defeated on his expedition against the Cimmerians."
(As for) the one who alters my inscribed object (and) disrespects my words, may the god Aššur, my lord, overthrow his sovereignty. May he destroy his name (and) his seed from the land. May the goddess Ištar, my mistress, bring about the defeat of his land. May he not stand firm before his enemy. May the god Adad strike his land with terrible lightning (and) afflict his land with want.
Seal of Nabû-ahhe-riba, scribe.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
The land of the chief eunuch is well.
... -ahu-iddina, son of Atâ-abu-šamê,
2,000 ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "The gods of the king, my lord, have provided peace for the king, my lord" —
a ditto of olives;
The chariot which goes to the Akitu House and comes back has no driver. Without a driver it rocks about.
Mannu-ki-...
you are a servant ...
... he has sent to ...
... his face
Good health to my lord!
To the king, my lord: your servant, Ahu-duri. Good health to the king, my lord!
... you
Ullusunu,
... the son of Anu
The king's word to the Babylonians, young and old: I am well; you can be glad. May Aššur, Šamaš, Bel, Nabû, Nergal, Ištar of Nineveh, and Ištar of Arbela bless the king, my lord, and may they give you long days and everlasting years.
In the month of Kislev (IX), the month of the goddess Ištar, the great mistress, I marched to the land Ḫanigalbat. I conquered the city Carchemish of the land Ḫanigalbat. I brought forth its gods, its goods, its possessions, (and) its people and counted (them) as booty. I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire the city Carchemish. The gods Adad and Šala, the gods of the city Carchemish, ...
Mannu-ki-Arbail, ... , and the chariot driver of the king of Elam ...
I am now sending to the king, my lord, the son of Nabû-ušallim, the cohort commander, and Nabû-ušallim together with the horses.
I tore down that small palace in its entirety, then I changed the course of the Tebilti River, repaired (the effects of) the erosion, and directed its outflow.
... the king, my lord
Witness Kinaya.
Witness Abdi-Himunu, palace farmer of the queen.
A tablet of NN to the king, his lord. Good health to the king, my lord!
The 'weapon'-mark of the 'increment' rises to the left.
Month Nisan (I), eponym year of Ša-Nabû-šû.
... they have ... ed ...
Now, the king, my lord, should not say: "Why did you not write to me?" I have written to you many times, but you have not paid attention to what I have written to you. Now, let the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
Witness I...
20 sheaves — Nabû-zeru-lešir
Witness ... -Nabû.
Concerning the ... about which the king, our lord, wrote to us, we have now sent the ... to the king, our lord. The king, our lord, should speak with them.
The king, my lord, should send a bodyguard to the Inner City; they should bring the bull colossi to the river bank, and I shall bring the rest of the tribute across (the river).
... of Ilu-šumu-imbi in the Arraphaean town of Zabban.
1 seah 1 'litre' of spiced bread; a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
... to the men
... , Enuma Anu Enlil,
May the goddess Ištar, mistress of war and battle, look upon this work with pleasure and may a good word for me be set upon her lips! May she determine as my fate a long life, fullness of old age, good health, and happiness! May she make the foundation of my royal throne secure for future days and may my reign endure as long as heaven and earth! May she make the weapons of the king of the gods, the lord of lords, prevail over all enemies!
... the names
... the palace herald
Disregard what they speak with their mouths, or what they think...
... to Nabû'a
I have written to the Palace. If I have done anything wrong, may the king, my lord, kill me.
I sent my messengers to the city rulers of the Upper Sea, and they brought me their substantial audience gift(s). I received from them horses, oxen, and sheep and goats, without number. I sent my eunuchs (and) governors with them, and they trampled the people living in those cities, (and) made (them) bow down at their feet.
An estate of 1 hectare ... adjoining ...
... they have made ...
... the king should not say: "He is a servant of mine!"
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
Bel and Nabû ...
1, the commander-in-chief of the ... ;
an estate of 4 decares adjoining Qurdi-Adad,
May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May Aššur, Bel and Nabû give long days to the king, my lord!
Witness Mannu-ki-Adad, royal bodyguard.
I have heard that the king of Elam has sent a letter to the king, my lord, saying: "The servants of the king, my lord, have come to me."
Bel-kenu-uṣur,
The one who crushed the Barnaki, a dangerous enemy, who live in the land Tīl-Ašurri, which is called Pitānu in the language of the people of the land Miḫrānu; the one who scattered the Mannean people, undisciplined Gutians — (as for) the land Patušarri, a district in the area of the salt desert, which is in the midst of the land of the distant Medes, borders Mount Bikni, (and) upon the soil of whose land none of the kings, my ancestors, had walked,
If the moon becomes visible in Nisan (I) on the 30th day: dispersal of all lands.
... Urdu and his brothers ...
... will they instigate an insurrection and rebellion against Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, and Assurbanipal, the crown prince of the Succession Palace, or cause others to instigate it?
Witness Šarru-kenu.
The king, my lord, should send word that they should be shown a house in Nineveh, and the king, my lord, should give me orders concerning the town of Dur-Šarruken.
I did not ...
I have given him the following order:
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Witness Zarutî, chariot driver of the crown prince.
... my ...
Witness Sin-zeru-ibni, ...
Fingernail of Pašî, owner of the vineyard being sold.
the equipment of the ...
If Scorpius is dark: the king will be shut up in his palace. — Mercury stands with Scorpius.
The palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of Assyria: booty of Karduniaš (Babylonia). As for the one who removes my inscription and my name: May the god Aššur, my lord, overthrow his sovereignty (and) destroy his name (and) his seed from the land. The one who erases my inscription
I said: "...
... a chariot
... before the goddess Ištar ...
Total, of the estate of Barzib, in the town of Til-rapši in the district of the city of Sarugi.
Does your great divinity know it? Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Witness Ilu-eriba, cohort commander.
... he/they ... my ... and ... my ... I/they ... his/its ... and his/its ... I/they ... his/its ... and his/its ... I/they ... his/its ... and his/its ... I/they ... his/its ... and his/its ... I/they ... his/its ... and his/its ...
If the earth quakes all day: dispersal of the land.
The 'station' is present. The 'path' on the left of the gall bladder ...
they go ...
... who ...
... Babylon
of Nabû-belu-ka''in ...
The prefects of the town of the royal bodyguard and the village managers of the royal bodyguard are in my presence. I have given them 200 (homers of) barley and 200 (homers of) wheat from the royal storehouses. They have also taken 300 (homers of) barley from the town of the royal bodyguard.
(As for) Hanūnu of the city Gaza, he heard about the advance of my expeditionary force, and (then) he abandoned the city Gaza and, in order to save his (own) life, he fled inside the city Thebes. The kings, governors, (and) officials whom I had stationed in Egypt came to meet me and kissed my feet.
... 20 hectares of field in the village of Abi-...
From Zakir.
Shalmaneser, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria:
Witness ...
I am now writing to the king, my lord: if the king, my lord, commands, I will perform the ritual of Aššur and Mullissu in the month of Adar (XII). I have performed it before Aššur and Mullissu in the month of Nisan (I), and it was acceptable to the gods. Now, in the month of Tishri (VII), I will perform it before Aššur and Mullissu again. It is favourable to do so.
... Aššur-ilaya
Witness Puṭi-Aya.
5 litres of wine according to the 'litre' of the king, belonging to Sukkaya, at the disposal of Zababa-eriba.
If the moon becomes visible in the 30th day: there will be frost, variant: rumor of the enemy.
Witness Kudurru, son of Aširâ, ...
Bel-duri, son of NN, servant of NN, has contracted and bought it for x minas of silver from NN.
... 16 tailors
Month Adar (XII), 10th day, eponym year of Mar-larim.
On the 17th day the king went up to the House of God. He performed the regular offering before Aššur and Mullissu. He seated the chanters and retired to the side room.
adjoining ...
... Babylon of ...
or Mukin-zeri ...
Witness Šarrat-samme.
Ditto by all the gods of Arbela!
By the command of the god Aššur, my lord, I marched to the land Ḫanigalbat. I conquered the city Arpad, the city of Ḫanigalbat. I brought forth their gods, their goods, their possessions, (and) their people and I counted (them) as booty. I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire the city Arpad.
6 oxen ...
... the gods of the king on the river ...
... he is ...
adjoining the field of Nabû-duru-uṣur,
Performed by Aššur-šallim.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. Good health to the king, my lord!
If a fog rolls in Shebat (XI): the land will go to ruin.
I have heard that ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nergal-šumu-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
from the town of Sar...
If a planet rises in Elul (VI): rising of business, thriving of grain.
At that time, the temple of the god Enlil, my lord, which a previous king had built, became dilapidated and old. I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I rebuilt (it) from top to bottom and deposited my monumental inscription.
Ditto.
I am also sending a letter to the king, my lord, concerning the news of the son of Yakin. He has gone to the land of the Nabayateans, and is staying there. I have heard that the son of Yakin is with him.
The chariot-horse-trainer ... has brought 20 horses ... , saying: "The king has given me orders to bring horses to Aššur."
... to ...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the magnates and governors of Bit-Kari and Saparda, together with the men, horses, and army at their disposal,
of Su...
deputy (governor),
If the earth quakes at night: worry for the land, variant: abandoning of the land.
At that time, the palace of the king of the land Elam, which is in the city Bīt-Imbî, which is on the border of the land Elam, which previously Shalmaneser (III), king of Assyria, had built, became dilapidated and old. I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I completed it from top to bottom and deposited my monumental inscription.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... the land of Raši
The commandant of Cutha and the commandant of Sippar have written to the king, my lord, saying: "The people of Cutha and Sippar are plotting against the king, my lord." I have heard these words; they are but lies. The people of Cutha and Sippar are not plotting against the king, my lord. They are plotting against each other. The king, my lord, should not believe them. The king, my lord, should not say: "The people of Cutha and Sippar are plotting against the king, my lord
... the magnates
Tomorrow, in the evening, the king will hear (about it). The king will kill me.
Your servant Ana-Nabû-taklak: I would gladly die for the king of the universe, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: I have sent my messenger to greet the king, the horses and the soldiers.
Witness Aširanu.
I marched to the city Qirbit, which is inside (Mount) Ḫarēḫasta (lit. “the city Ḫarēḫasta”), since Tandāya, their city ruler, had never bowed down to the yoke of the kings, my ancestors, and the people living in the city Qirbit
Witness Nabû-ahu-uṣur, scribe.
Concerning the substitute king about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me, the substitute king will sit for 100 days.
2, Nabû-iddina, cohort commander of the chief eunuch;
The 'well-being' is present. The gall bladder is flattened. The 'base of the throne' is present.
Total 4 men, owners of the women being sold.
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-dur-paniya. Good health to the king, my lord!
I have written to the king, my lord, (about) the news of the Urarṭian. The messenger ...
If Adad thunders on the day of disappearance of the moon: the harvest will prosper, business will be steady.
Month Adar (XII), 22nd day, eponym year of Dananu, the treasurer.
The bakers and brewers who are in my service and the boatmen who transport the wood are all in my presence. I have written to the king, my lord, that they should be brought here, and I have sent them a messenger. As soon as they come, I shall send them to the king, my lord.
a total of 5 persons, in all a household —
I have heard that the king, my lord, has given orders to the prefects and the cohort commanders, saying: "Let them go and bring down the rest of the people of the country who are still there." I have sent word, and they are on their way. As soon as they have brought down the rest of the people of the country, I shall write to the king, my lord, whatever news there is.
I have sent to you my messengers, but they have not come back; they are still there.
Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
I placed Tu-Baʾlu on the royal throne over them and imposed upon him tribute (and) payment (in recognition) of my overlordship (to be delivered) yearly (and) without interruption.
12 shekels of silver belonging to NN, at the disposal of Abi-...
The chariot-driver of Aššur, the 'third man' of Aššur, the 'weapon'-mark of Aššur, the 'path' of Ea, the 'well-being' of Aššur, the 'path' of the Anunnaki, the 'weapon'-mark of the gods, the 'path' of the gods, the 'well-being' of the gods, the 'path' of the gods, the 'well-being' of the gods, the 'path' of the gods, the 'well-being' of the
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
... Ilu-ilu
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial audience gift from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
until the ... s come.
... of ...
The breast-bone is thick. First extispicy...
11 shekels of ... -gum;
The sons of Sin-iddina, who are in the presence of the king, my lord,
Total, ...
1 ... ;
If the moon makes an eclipse in the evening watch and finishes the watch, and the north wind blows: the king of Akkad will die.
1 cow of silver;
He said: "Why did you send ... to me? ... "
... the land of Sūḫu, the kings of the land of Sūḫu
... I annexed to Assyria the lands Bīt-Ḫamban, Sumurzu, Bīt-Barrūa, Bīt-Zualzaš, (and) Bīt-Matti, the city Niqqu of the land Tupliaš, the lands Bīt-Taranzāya, Parsua, (and) Bīt-Kapsi, as far as the city Zakruti of the mighty Medes, (and) I placed a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over them.
(As for) the one who alters my inscribed object (and) disrespects my words, may the goddess Ištar, mistress of war and battle, break his weapon, bring about the defeat of his army, (and) hand him over to his enemies; may she (Ištar) make him sit bound at the feet of his enemies, and may she make him (lit. “his arms”) bear the yoke of his enemies. May she make him (lit. “his arms”) have no strength, may she make him (lit. “his arms”) not be able to do
Let me come and speak with him, and let me come and speak with Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, and the crown prince of Babylon, about these matters. Let them give me orders, and let them send me a royal bodyguard to do whatever the king, my lord, commands.
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
2 minas of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, goldsmith.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
the son of Ubrî
Instead of their seals they impressed their fingernails.
The heart of the ram is normal...
Anu, the Great Gods, Šalimtu, Šunipuru, the Narudi, the Twins, Fire, Nabû, Belet-ili, the Lady of Akkad, the Lady of Babylon, Ea, Damkina, Ninurta, Nergal, Nusku, the Sebetti, the gods of the Akitu Chapel, the gods of the House of Aššur, the gods of the House of Anu, the gods of the House of Adad, the gods of the House of Šamaš, the gods of the House of
Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, who is now ill and on whom the 'hand' of god Nanaya of Uruk is being 'placed' in extispicy, (whom) your great divinity knows —
among the elders ...
Abi-hari, reporter.
ditto, the palace manager;
... the town of Birtu ...
The report on the Urarṭian is still the same.
... Month Adar (XII), 22nd day, eponym year of NN.
On the 16th day of the month ... , the day ... , the moon ...
... with you
Šumma-Aššur has contracted and bought them for 30 shekels of silver.
... the king, my lord, ...
in the charge of Aqaraya, son of the merchant.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
I have sent you my messenger. As soon as the king, my lord, sends him back, I shall send you my messenger.
... s
The king of Babylon, the king of the lands, the king of the four quarters, the one who fashioned the image of (the god) Aššur, the one who built Ebabbar, the one who renovated Esagil and Ezida, the one who ... the great gods, the one who ... the great gods, the one who ... the great gods, the one who ... the great gods, the one who ... the great gods, the one who ... the great gods, the one who ... the great gods,
... let them give
(As for) the one who alters my inscribed object (and) disrespects my words, may the great gods, as many as are recorded on this inscribed object, curse him with a harsh, irreversible curse, and may they overthrow his kingship, deprive him of his life, (and) eradicate his name, his seed, his offspring, (and) his progeny from the mouth of the people.
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... Arrapha ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
NN has contracted and bought it from Šulmu-... for ...
... I sent ... to the city Qirbit, which is in the district of the land Ḫarḫar, and they went (and) brought down ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Issar-nadin-apli, the foreman of the collegium of ten (scribes) of Arbela. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
6, the village of the ... s;
Witness Ilu-...
Aššur-da''in-šarru, son of NN, ...
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
4 ... -garments of linen, ... ;
If he does not pay, the king, my lord, will kill me.
8 wooden ... s, polished, ... ;
... the fowler
This is from before Aššur.
As to the news of the Babylonians, I have heard that they have entered Babylon. They have not yet come out, however, and I have not heard any news about them. As soon as I have heard more, I shall write to the king, my lord.
I have heard that ... is plotting against me. I have heard that he has said to the son of Yakin: "You are my son; I will give you the kingship of Elam." I have heard that he has said to the son of Yakin: "You will rule over the land of Akkad."
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: reliable speech; the land will become happy.
Month Iyyar (II), ... th day, eponym year of NN, governor of ...
... "to my father ...
... the 'finger' is thick. The lower part is elevated...
... of the Itu'eans ...
... of the palace superintendent
in my mouth ...
Witness Qurdi-...
... the Ru'ueans
In the eponymy of Šulmu-šarri, the governor of the city Talmusu, I marched a second time to the land Ḫabḫu. I conquered the city Talmusu, his fortified city, together with the cities in its environs. I massacred many of them (and) carried off captives, possessions, (and) property from them. I razed, destroyed, (and) burnt the city. I marched to the source of the Tigris, the place where the water comes out, (and) made
... their ...
they should do as they wish ...
... the Chaldeans
I had a bridge constructed opposite the Citadel Gate with paving stones of white limestone for the passage of my lordly chariot. I had the name of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, inscribed on it and I placed (it) in the possession of the goddess Ištar, my mistress.
Witness Mannu-ki-Arbail, son of Bar-hatê.
Il-yada' who ...
Nabû-šumu-iddina, my scribe,
I built (and) completed that palace from its foundations to its battlements.
I sent my eunuchs and governors against them. They conquered the city Qirbit, his royal city, (and) carried off 20,000 people, together with their possessions, his booty, his property, his goods, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his gods, his possessions, his property, his goods, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his booty, his property, his goods, his god, his goddess, his possessions, his property, (and) his goods. I annexed the city Qirbit to Ass
Witness Igilî.
Bel-dan,
4 sheep ... ;
... s, 1 seah of sesame,
The Babylonians have written to me: "... " — I have written to them: "... " They have not agreed to send their messenger to me, nor have they agreed to give me any orders. They have not agreed to do anything at all.
I have heard that the son of Yakin has said: "...
At that time, the palace of the city Aššur, my lord, which Ilu-šumma, my forefather, had previously built — that palace had become dilapidated and I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I rebuilt (it) from top to bottom.
Witness NN, ša šēpi guard.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
Bel-aha-iddin, eunuch of the queen, has contracted and bought it for 1/2 mina of silver.
Disregard what happens after my stipulated term...
Witness Aššur-šallim, ditto.
... &  beer  &  ...
I marched to the land Ḫatti. I conquered the lands Amurru, Ḫamat, Luḫuʾatu, Ḫašmar, (and) Ḫašmaru, the lands on the seacoast. I received tribute from the people of Tyre (and) Sidon. I crossed over to the land Mašgun (and) conquered the city Arwad. I received tribute from the people of Arwad. Moving on from the land Mašgun I approached the city Byblos. I
The 28th day: joy of heart.
30 ... at the disposal of NN,
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhe, conscript.
... s, their seed, their offspring
In the uplands of Mount Ammanāna (northern Anti-Lebanon), they (Aššur and Ištar) disclosed to me the location of alabaster, which in the time of the kings, my ancestors, was too expensive (even) for the pommel of a sword. Therein, I quarried mighty mountain sheep colossi, sphinxes, and large stone slabs for the requirements of my palace.
Witness Šumma-Adad.
5 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish, belonging to Nabû-šumu-uṣur, at the disposal of Nabû-šezib, son of Nabû-šumu-iddina, from the town of Dadi-iqbi.
Total, 4 ... of the goddess Ištar.
Mannu-ki-Aššur,
6 bags of sesame;
Ninurta-iddin,
Tablet of Aššur-killanni, the governor of Que.
He said: "Nabû-ušabši ...
Total, of 8 persons, 8 donkeys.
To the king, my lord: your servant PN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Remanni-Adad or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or his prefect or any relative of his, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Šumma-ilani and his sons and his nephews,
(As for) the people of the land Ḫilakku, who live in the high mountains, (and) who had not bowed down to the yoke of the kings, my ancestors, they brought to me as their audience gift 12,000 (measures of) wine, 12,000 (measures of) ... , 12,000 (measures of) ... , 12,000 (measures of) ... , 12,000 (measures of) ... , 12,00
Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, I: With limestone, stone from the mountains, I had the akītu-house of the steppe (and) the house of the baths of the city Galaḫḫi built anew and I raised (it) as high as a mountain. I had twin doors of cedar, the pure wood, installed in its gates. I had magnificent cedar beams, grown on Mount Sirāra,
Total, 3: the 'residence' of Bel-zeru-ibni, ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nadin-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord!
Ninurta-ilaya,
... the town of ...
... the city god
... upon them ...
Ešarra, “House of the assembly of the gods”: the house of Belat-ekalli.
I, Adad-nārārī, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Arik-dīn-ili, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Enlil-nārārī (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of the god Aššur; valiant man who acts with the support of Aššur, his lord, and has no
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Aššur-na'di, son of Aššur-le'i, about whom you wrote to me — send him to me!" — I am herewith sending him to the king, my lord.
... the chariot of the goddess Ištar
I am a dog who fears you; I am a dog who fears your lordship. May I see light under your protection! May I be happy! May I not die! May I not be deprived of food and water! May I not be deprived of my field! May I not be deprived of my orchard! May I not be deprived of my ... !
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of all the four quarters, sun(god) of all people, prince, vice-regent of Aššur, chosen of the gods Enlil and Ninurta, beloved of the gods Anu and Dagan, destructive weapon of the great gods, avenger, the king who acts with the support of Aššur and the god Šamaš, the gods his allies, and has no rival among the princes of the four quarters, splendid king, fear
1 woman, 1 donkey, ...
... let them do
The servants of the king of Babylon who are in the city of Der, have not been able to cultivate the arable fields there. They have gone up to the ... of the king of Babylon, and are ... there.
with ...
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 21st day, eponym year of Dadî, treasurer.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why have you not sent me any news of the Mannean that you have heard?" — now then I have written to my lord everything that I have heard.
... the goddess Dinitu, the goddess Ištar, ... the goddesses Tašmētu, Nanāya, (and) Uṣur-amāssu, the great gods, my lords, ... the goddesses Bēlet-ilī, Bēlet-parṣē, (and) Bēlet-bābili, the great gods, my lords, ... the goddesses Gula, Šarur, Šargaz, ... the goddesses Nanāya, Šarrat-nipha, (and)
The one who crushed the Barnaki, a dangerous enemy, who live in the land Tīl-Ašurri, which is called Pitānu in the language of the people of the land Miḫrānu; the one who scattered the Mannean people, undisciplined Gutians — (as for) the land Patušarri, a district in the area of the salt desert, which is in the midst of the land of the distant Medes, borders Mount Bikni, (and) upon the soil of whose land none of the kings, my ancestors, had walked,
The forts and the land of the king, my lord, are well. The king, my lord, can be glad.
at the disposal of Ubru-Nabû, ...
Šumma-ilani has contracted and bought them from Mannu-ki-Adad for 1/2 mina of silver by the mina of the king.
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
Witness Bel-na'id,
1 sheep, 1 bowl (of wine): commander of the chariotry.
The king, my lord, should know (this).
2, NN, chief ... ;
... the xth day;
... the servants of Nabû-ahhe-iddina, the commander-in-chief, who are in the city of Nemed-Ištar, have come to me. I have given them bread and water, and sent them to the Palace. They are saying: "The men who are with us are servants of Nabû-ahhe-iddina. The commander-in-chief has sent us to greet (him)."
The king, my lord, should send word that they should bring me ... ; I shall then bring them to the king, my lord. I have written to the ... of the king, my lord, (about) the ... of the Itu'eans, but they have not agreed to bring them to me. I have written to the chief scribe about the ... of the Itu'eans, but he has not agreed to bring them to me either.
If a fog rolls in Shebat (XI): the harvest of the land will prosper.
The king, my lord, should send word that they should be shown a house each in Nineveh, and that they should be allowed to stay there. The king, my lord, should also send word that they should be allowed to enter the temple of Bel and the temples of the king, my lord, so that they may pray to Bel and the king, my lord, for the life of the king, my lord.
The palace of Aššur-nādin-aḫḫē, king of the universe, king of Assyria.
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
of the palace ... of the town of ...
... I gave to the god Nabû, my lord, as a gift a gold ... , a gold ... , a gold ... , a gold ... , a gold ... , a gold ... , a gold ... , a gold ... , a gold ... , a gold ... , a gold ... , a gold ... , a gold ... , a gold ... , a gold ... , a gold ... , a gold ... , a gold ... , a gold ... , a gold ... , a gold ... , a gold ... , a gold ... , a gold ... , a gold ... , a gold ... , a gold ... , a gold ... ,
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
as we ...
I took the city Elenzaš as a royal city and a fortress for that district, and (then) I changed its former name and called it Kār-Sennacherib.
1,000 (homers) of barley belonging to these gentlemen, at the disposal of Šulmu-beli-lašme, the brewer.
I have sent ...
I have written to the Palace. If it is agreeable to the king, my lord, let the king, my lord, send me a sealed order, and I shall bring the logs to the king, my lord.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
... he is a ... of the king
Month Iyyar (II), 10th day, eponym year of Šulmu-beli-lašme, governor of Der.
Witness Mudabir-ilu, scribe.
... Witness Uqur-ṣabtî.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why have you not sent me any news of the Mannean that you have heard?"
to ...
the words of his father in ...
x minas of silver belonging to the harem manageress, at the disposal of Amurrî.
Witness Šulmu-beli-lamur, from Calah.
and when he came,
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether, (should) Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, appoint the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the position which is written in this papyrus,
100 (hectares) of field in the town of Lahiru, 100 (hectares) of field in the town of Til-rahayate, 100 (hectares) of field in the town of Til-abnâ, in all 300 (hectares of field) in the province of the chief cupbearer.
... the fort ...
... king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, ...
I have written to NN, but he has not agreed to ... ; he is ... and does not ... anything.
... huzunu-garments, felted, the edging red, of the country;
If the sun stands in the halo of the moon: there will be truth in the land, and the son will speak the truth with his father.
... Abi-ramu, chariot driver,
The god Aššur, king of the gods, looked steadfastly upon me among all of the rulers and he made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
Witness Dusî, servant of the vizier.
... I am herewith sending him to the king, my lord.
shall place 10 minas of refined silver (and) one mina of pure gold in the lap of Belanu, and shall return the money tenfold to its owner. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed. The judge shall not heed his case.
... Witness Inurta-šarru-uṣur.
... to the guard
If the moon is surrounded by a halo, and the sun stands in it: the king of the land will widen his understanding.
Witness Nabû-šezib.
... to ...
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... 8 (items): a stand, a potstand, a folding screen, a chair, a cupbearer’s (pot)stand, a folding screen, a cupbearer’s (pot)stand, a folding screen, a cupbearer’s (pot)stand, a folding screen, a cupbearer’s (pot)stand, a folding screen, a cupbearer’s (pot)stand, a folding screen, a cupbearer’s (pot)stand, a folding screen, a cupbearer’s (pot)stand,
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, ditto.
... , a total of 3 persons,
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
The money is paid completely. That ... is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
the commander-in-chief ...
Concerning the ... about which you wrote to me, I have sent ...
... they have been sold for silver.
... of the land of Nairi ...
The city Qattāru.
... the god Nabû, my lord, in the month of ... , in the eponymy of ... , governor of the land Samaria (645).
Should Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, appoint the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the position which is written in this papyrus?
Afterwards, Uallî, his son, sat on his throne. He saw the might of the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Nergal, (and) Nusku, the great gods, my lords, and bowed down to my yoke. For the preservation of his (own) life, he opened up his hands to me (and) made an appeal to my lordly majesty. He
Zeru-ukin, son of Marduk-šarru-uṣur,
The people of the land of Akkad, all of them, have turned their faces towards the king, my lord. They have sent their messengers to greet the king, my lord. They have written to me, saying: "The king, our lord, has turned his face towards us. We have sent our messengers to greet the king, our lord. We have written to the king, our lord, saying: 'The king, our lord, has turned his face towards us. We have sent our messengers to greet the king, our lord.'
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šarru-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
... I will not give
... and the king of Elam ... they have been plotting against me ... in the city of ...
I have heard that the chief of the masons has come to the king, my lord; let the king, my lord, ask him what I/he/they are doing.
did not agree ...
they are bringing horses ...
I have written ...
Five days ago, when the king, my lord, was in the presence of Nabû-belu-ka''in, I said to him: "Let me go to Dur-Šarruken." He said: "You are not to go."
... in the district of ... he has not been able to ... the king's subjects who are there ...
... 4 persons;
a ditto of quinces;
... The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... his ... to his ...
3, the son of Nabû-zeru-lešir;
Mars has moved from the constellation Aries to the constellation Scorpius. This is its interpretation: Mars is the star of the Westland; the Westland will experience evil. The king of the Westland will die, and there will be hostility in the land.
I have heard that ...
9 (cuts of) meat, the New Palace;
So that the construction of my palace might be carried out correctly, at that time, the god Aššur and the goddess Ištar, who love my priestly service (and) who selected me (lit. “who called my name”), revealed to me a source of trunks of cedar, which since distant days grew thick as they stood in seclusion in the Sirāra mountain range.
The 'station' is present. The 'paths' are 2, the lower one is short. The upper part is elevated. The 'well-being' is present...
To the god Nabû, king of the gods, his lord: Aššur-dān, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Tiglath-pileser (I), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (I) (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of Aššur, has dedicated (this) for his
1/2 mina of silver belonging to the harem manageress, at the disposal of Šarru-lu-dari.
... before ...
... my ...
I have heard that the son of Zabaya has come to the Palace. I have heard that he is a servant of the Palace. I have heard that he is a son of a palace servant.
... before me ...
I have heard that the crown prince of Elam has come to the border of Bit-Yakin and is on his way to ... ; he is ... ing the ... of Bit-Yakin.
These are the relevant interpretations.
... the town of Til-Barsip
40 sheep,
I brought Dunānu (and) his brother Aplāya, sons of Bēl-iqīša, out of that city alive. I brought out his wife, his sons, his daughters, his (palace) women, male singers, (and) female singers and I counted (them) as booty. I brought out silver, gold, property, (and) the treasures of his palace and I counted (them) as booty. I brought out eunuchs, his attendants, engineers, (and) his food preparers and I counted (them
let him do ...
4 Kushite horses from the treasurer of the Aššur temple;
adjoining the house of Abi-... ,
In the time of your royal father, Aššur-dur-paniya, the scribe of the king, my lord, wrote to me:
... in the hands of Aššur-ila'i ...
Indabibi, who sat on the throne of the land Elam after Tammarītu, knew about the might of my weapons that had prevailed over the land Elam and (as for) the Assyrians whom I had sent (viii 10') to aid Nabû-bēl-šumāti, (his) brother, with whom they used to march about protecting his land like a friend and ally (and) whom Nabû-bēl-šumāti had seized by guile during the night (and) confined in prison, Indab
12 minas of silver belonging to Nergal-šarru-uṣur, at the disposal of Šarru-lu-dari.
At that time, the temple of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, which is in Nineveh,
The gods of Assyria in the side room of the temple of Anu.
1 goose, 1 duck, 10 turtledoves.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nashir-Bel. Good health to the king, my lord!
... Natan, son of Nabû-šezib
Nabû-šallim,
6 straight garments, felted, the edging ... ;
I roared loudly like a storm (and) thundered like the god Adad against all of the troops of the wicked enemies. By the command of the god Aššur, the great lord, my lord, I blew like the onset of a severe storm against the enemy on (their) flanks and front lines. With the weapons of the god Aššur, my lord, and my fierce battle array, I turned them back and made them retreat. (v 10) I shot the troops of the enemy with uṣṣu-arrows (and) mulmullu
... of the palace manager
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), capable shepherd, favorite of the great gods, guardian of truth who loves justice, renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the insubmissive, (and) the one who strikes enemies with lightning:
I had a stele made and had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, written on it. I erected (it) in (that) city.
1 1/3 mina ... of the queen mother;
Ashur-bunaya-usur,
The son of Yakin has written to me: "I am ill; let them give me a physician."
I annexed to Assyria the lands Bīt-Ḫamban, Sumurzu, Bīt-Barrūa, Bīt-Zualzaš, (and) Bīt-Matti, the city Niqqu of the land Tupliaš, the lands Bīt-Taranzāya, Parsua, Bīt-Kapsi, Bīt-Sangi, Bīt-Urzakki, Bīt-Abdadāni, Bīt-Kapsi, Bīt-S
The chariot which goes to the Akitu House and comes back has no driver.
The woman Šumutî, 3 sons of hers;
If a fog rolls in Nisan (I): the land will go to ruin.
He shall return the money tenfold to its owner.
... the goddess Bēlet-ilī, who ... the heroic god Marduk ...
Concerning Aššur-belu-taqqin about whom the king wrote to me: "Let him come!" —
... the gods of the sky
to ...
the king, my lord, ...
To the 'farmer,' our lord: your servants Adad-šumu-uṣur and Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health to our lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless our lord!
before ...
From Ašaredu.
Witness Balasî.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did you not write to me?" I have now written to the king, my lord.
A later prince ... may restore its weakened (portions) (and) return my inscribed name to its place. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
you ...
I pursued them on the peaks of the mountains and defeated them. I conquered, plundered, destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire their cities.
... the scribe of ...
Witness Adad-aplu-iddina.
... the chariot of the king
... of the ... s
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
I had a stele made and had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, written on it. With inscribed objects of earlier rulers, my ancestors, I deposited (it) for ever after in the citadel wall of Nineveh, my capital city, for the kings, my descendants.
... Ilu-pada ...
... I and the king
He shall pay in the month of Shebat (XI). If he does not pay, it shall increase by a fourth.
... them ...
In the eponymy of Šulmu-beli-lašme, governor of the land Talmusu (695), I marched a second time to the land Ḫabḫu. I received the tribute of the land Ḫabḫu.
in all x persons, servants of these gentlemen —
... s to the king
has taken ...
Sphinxes of alabaster, as well as sphinxes of cast urudû-copper that were overlaid with zaḫalû-silver, and sphinxes of cast ... -metal, whose features were brilliant: I erected over them columns of ebony, cypress, cedar, daprānu-juniper, juniper, and Indian wood, with pašallu-gold and silver inlays, and (then) I positioned the architraves of the inner rooms of my lordly residence (on those columns).
... to the presence of ...
... the letter which my father ...
Performed in Arbela.
... The coils of the colon are 16 in number...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "The Itu'eans should go with you" —
As for me, I am a servant who reveres his great divinity. I am a shepherd who is attentive to his command. I am a guardian who is assiduous towards his sanctuary. (But) now, in this very way, I have not been able to please him. I have not seen his face, (and) I have not heard his answer to my prayers.
To the king, my lord: your servant, Nabû-bani-ahhe. Good health to the king, my lord. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord.
With the support of the great gods, my lords, I advanced and marched against Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II), the king of the land Elam who had not bowed down to my yoke. (iv 10) In the course of my campaign, I conquered the cities Bīt-Ḫaʾiri (and) Raṣā, cities on the border of Assyria that the Elamites had taken away by force in the time of my ancestor(s). I had my garrisons stationed inside them. (iv
To the king, our lord: your servants Nabû-ra'im-nišešu (and) Salamanu. Good health to the king, our lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, our lord!
