I roofed them (the palatial halls) with beams of cedar (and) cypress. I fastened bands of silver and copper on doors of white cedar (and) cypress and I installed (them) in their gates.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
15 shekels of silver, of Issar-na'id, the cohort commander of ...
5 shekels, 1/2 mina: the chief of the accounts.
... the 'station' ...
what I/he ...
... the Nineveh wall
... Now then ...
Total, the house of the ...
Your servant Nabû-šarru-uṣur: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
Witness Barruqu, chariot driver.
Afterwards, the god Marduk, the great lord, took pity on my deeds and, by his holy command, I, Nabopolassar, king of Babylon, the one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, the one who renovates the cult centers of the great gods, the one who performs good deeds, the one who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, (and) the one who is constantly attentive to their needs,
2 necklaces ... ;
Witness Urdu-Nabû, scribe.
... , 100 sheep, 100 oxen, 100 donkeys, 100 camels, 100 ... , 100 ... , 100 ... , 100 ... , 100 ... , 100 ... , 100 ... , 100 ... , 100 ... , 100 ... , 100 ... , 100 ... , 100 ... , 100 ... , 100 ... , 100 ... , 10
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
... 1 'litre' of bread for ...
1, of the 'sons of bušu';
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the ... th day of this month, the month ... of this year,
4 cavalry mounts from the treasurer of the Aššur temple:
40 hectares of field in the village of ... -iddina, 40 hectares of field in the village of ... ,
Month Adar (XII), 12th day, eponym year of Bel-iqbi, governor of Tušhan.
... Šulmu-šumu-...
Ahu-nagi ...
... the 'well-being' is present. The 'base of the throne' ...
... -ilu, ... ; NN, 1 vineyard, 2 ... , 3 ... ;
I settled 3,000 Assyrian criminal(s) in the land Hamath. I set a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over them and imposed the yoke of my lordship upon them.
Nabû, Tašmetu, Nanaya,
... of the goddess Ištar, mistress of the lands, who dwells in Egašankalamma, which is inside ...
I received tribute from the land Sūḫu, the land Amurru, the land Moab, the land Edom, the land Ekron, the land Gaza, the land Saparda, the city Arwad, the city Byblos, the city Sidon, the city Arqâ, the land Samsimurruna, the land Bīt-Ammon, the land Bīt-Barrû, the land Bīt-Kapsi, the land Bīt-Zualzaš, the city Tyre, the city Ashkelon, the
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether NN or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or ...
Witness Mannu-ki-Libbali, scribe.
... the goddess Ištar, mistress of battle and war, who loves my priestly service, gave to me the wild beasts and commanded me to hunt. I killed 1,000 strong lions from my ... chariot with my wildly vigorous assault with the spear. I killed 1,000 strong wild bulls from my ... chariot with my wildly vigorous assault with the spear. I killed 1,000 strong ostriches from my ... chariot with my wildly vigorous assault with the spear.
... the king, your lord, is your god
If Jupiter becomes steady in the morning: enemy kings will be reconciled.
... Ikkaru in ...
... of the moat
10 shekels of silver belonging to Edu-šallim, at the disposal of Milki-nuri.
Witness Sasî, porter.
... of the land ... I brought ... to my city Aššur. I reorganized that land (and) imposed one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the gods of Assyria, my lords. I placed ... eunuchs of mine as provincial governors over them. I annexed that land to Assyria (and) added it to the province of the chief cupbearer.
Aššur has opened your ears ...
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
The king, my lord, should send word that they should be shown a house in Nineveh and live there, and that they should be given bread and water and kept alive until the king, my lord, comes and settles them in their country.
horses ...
(As for) Gyges, the king of the land Lydia — a remote place, the mention of whose name none of the kings, my ancestors, had (ever) heard — (the god) Aššur, the great lord, made him see in a dream the mention of my royal name. On the (very) day he saw this dream, he sent his mounted messenger to inquire about my well-being.
The son of Ašipâ, the son of ... , the son of ... , the son of Aššur-remanni, the son of ... , the son of Aššur-šallimanni, the son of ... , the son of Aššur-šallimanni, the son of ... , the son of Aššur-šallimanni, the son of ... , the son of Aššur-šallimanni, the son of ... , the son of Aššur-šallimanni, the son of ... , the son of A
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Witness Šarru-emuranni.
One beam: length 25 royal cubits, width one cubit, thickness one cubit; one beam: length 25 royal cubits, width one cubit, thickness one cubit; one beam: length 25 royal cubits, width one cubit, thickness one cubit; one beam: length 25 royal cubits, width one cubit, thickness one cubit; one beam: length 25 royal cubits, width one cubit, thickness one cubit; one beam: length 25 royal cubits, width one cubit, thickness one cubit; one beam
The money is paid completely.
The palace of Sennacherib, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, I:
The king, my lord, should send word that they should be shown a house in Nineveh and live there, and that they should be given bread and water and kept alive until the king, my lord, comes.
I placed Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II), who had fled to me (and) had grasped my feet, on his (Teumman’s) throne. I installed Tammarītu, his third brother, as king in the city Ḫidalu. (With) the chariots, wagons, horses, mules, harness-broken (steeds), (and) equipment suited for war that I captured between the city Susa (and) the Ulāya River with the support of (the god) Aššur (and
If a planet becomes visible in Elul (VI): the harvest of the land will prosper.
Bel-ahu-uṣur, chariot owner;
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Remanni-Adad or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or his prefect or his cohort commander or his ... , and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Bel-duri and his sons and his grandsons,
A tablet of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, to the scribe of the palace, his lord. Good health to my lord!
Month of Tebet (X), 25th day, eponym year of Sagab (651).
... the weaving of ...
... and ...
The second one is ...
Šamšī-Adad, king of the universe.
... of ... -ramu
Total 4: the Hamureans.
By the gods of the king, my lord, there is no fault of mine before the king, my lord! I have not concealed anything from the king, my lord!
... and the rest of the audience gift
Now, if you do not believe me, ... ; if you do believe me, ...
Abda', gardener; ... ; a total of x people.
All this is of the king's household.
... servant of NN
If a planet rises in Elul (VI): rising of business, thriving of grain.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Zabinu or his sons or his grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against the harem manageress,
Aššur-etel-ilani, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Assurbanipal, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Esarhaddon, (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of Aššur:
I have heard that they are saying: "The ... of the king of Elam has been defeated on his expedition against the Cimmerians. The ... of the king of Elam has been defeated on his expedition against the Manneans. The ... of the king of Elam has been defeated on his expedition against the Medes."
... the brother of Zeru-ibni in the temple of DN
... the governors
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Concerning the ...
Witness Nabû-...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Remutu or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or his prefect or his cohort commander or his labour-duty superior, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Šumma-ilani and his sons and his grandsons,
all the men ...
1 hectare 5 decares of field in the village of Dayyan-Adad, adjoining the field of the scribe, the field of the priest, and the road to Calah;
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šarru-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
News of the son of Yakin: he is in ...
... the king, my lord ...
If on the 15th day the moon and sun are seen together: a strong enemy will raise his weapons against the land; the enemy will tear down the city gate.
Witness Se'-šimki.
The king, my lord, should send word that they should be shown a house in Nineveh, and that they should live there.
Now, what are the king my lord's instructions? May the gods of the king, my lord, give long days and everlasting years to the king, my lord! May they grant the king, my lord, happiness and physical well-being! May they make the heart of the king, my lord, happy!
a writing-board ...
Witness Aplaya, ...
in the presence of the royal bodyguard ...
Just as a snake and a mongoose do not enter the same hole to lie there together but think only of cutting each other's throat, so may you and your women not enter the same room to lie down in the same bed.
(Property) of Tašmētu-šarrat, queen of Sargon (II), king of Assyria.
Performed in the New Palace.
Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, who is now intent on sending NN to the district of Karkaššî, and (whom) your great divinity knows — should he go, will he escape, be saved, extricate himself from, get out of, or save himself from the troops of the Medes, or from the troops of the Manneans, or from the troops of the Cimmerians, or from any other enemy? Will he return alive from that district and set foot on Assyrian soil? Will he safely enter his palace in Nineveh?
Month Tishri (VII), ... th day, eponym year of Aššur-duru-uṣur (652).
Ilu-iqbi,
after ...
they are making ...
... the blood
... the elders ...
Now Adad-šumu-uṣur, the commander-in-chief ...
thrice I marched to the lands Nairi (and) conquered the interior of the land Ḫabḫu. I received tribute from the land Gilzānu (and) the land Kummuḫu. I conquered the city Tīl-Garimme, a royal city of the land Kummuḫu. I conquered the city Tīl-Abāri, a royal city of the land Ḫabḫu.
... Aššur-mukin-pale'
... the messenger of the king of Elam has come to us, saying: "... the king of Assyria
I sent a eunuch of mine, the chief eunuch, to the land Ellipi. He conquered the city ... , which is on the border of the land Ellipi, and ... the land Ellipi.
... in the palace
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 7th day, eponym year of Bel-lu-dari, governor of Samaria.
I received tribute from Qalparunda, the Patinean: silver, gold, tin, bronze, bronze casseroles, bronze pails, bronze pots, bronze pots with inlays of gold, bronze ...
Witness Nabû-dur-beli, son of the mayor.
To Sennacherib:
You sing, “... , you are the most splendid of the gods.”
... the emissaries of ...
I had statues of my royal majesty skillfully made from silver, gold, bronze, ... -stone, breccia, alabaster, elephant ivory, ebony, boxwood, musukkannu-wood, cedar, cypress, juniper, elammaku-wood, (and) Indian wood, and (then) I erected (them) in their positions.
of the people of my country ...
The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The king, my lord, should send a royal bodyguard to come and have a look at the fort. If it is in good condition, let them leave it; if not, let the king, my lord, send a royal bodyguard to come and supervise the work. The king, my lord, should know (this) before he comes.
... the rear part
If there is a 'weapon'-mark in the top of the 'finger' which faces the base of the 'finger,' it is the mark of a bow.
Afterwards, the king of the land Elam, the king of the land Gambulu, the king of the land Ḫilmu, the king of the land Pillatu, the king of the land Ḫupapanu, the king of the land Bīt-Adini, the king of the land Bīt-Amukāni, the king of the land Bīt-Šilāni, the king of the land Bīt-Saʾalli, the king of the land Bīt-Imbî, the king of the land B
Witness Tabalayu.
I have sent my messenger to the king, my lord.
NN, gate-guard;
The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
Concerning the ... about which Aššur-... wrote to me, ... the men ...
Now then I am writing to my lord:
... the goddess Bēlet-ilī, the great lady,
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, then I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, fortified cities, together with the small(er) settlements in their environs (and) the district of the land Bīt-Barrû in its entirety, and I added (this area)
Witness Mannu-...
The palace of Aššur-rēša-iši, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Mutakkil-Nusku, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-dān (I) (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur: (brick) belonging to the courtyard of the temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nadin-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May Aššur, Sin, Šamaš, Bel, Nabû, Nergal, Ištar of Nineveh and Ištar of Arbela call vigour, health, happiness, physical well-being and lasting days for the king, my lord!
Afterwards, Uallî, his son, sat on his throne. He saw the might of the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Šarrat-Kidmuri, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Nergal, (and) Nusku, the great gods, my lords, and bowed down to my yoke. For the preservation of his (own) life, he opened up his hands to me (and) made an
The king should ask the priest of Ištar ...
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 19th day, eponym year of La-baši, chief vizier.
2 cuts of shoulder. Of 2 oxen: the stomachs,
The king, my lord, should ask Aššur-remanni and Aššur-naṣir: "Did you not go to the aid of the king of Elam?" They will say: "We did not go to the aid of the king of Elam. We went to the aid of the king of Assyria." The king, my lord, should not say: "Why did you not go to the aid of the king of Elam?" The king, my lord, should say: "You are my servants. Why did you not come to my aid?" I have written to the king
If the king, my lord, so orders, I will send the men to the treasurer, and he will give them to the prefect.
We are the king's servants. May we see light under your protection!
The king, my lord, should not trust the heart of the king, my lord! ...
Seal of NN,
I had a stele made and had inscribed on it the mighty victories of the god Aššur, my lord, and my personal achievements inscribed thereon. I erected (it) for ever after in the land of the city Tīl-Barsip.
1, Nabû-šarru-uṣur, governor of Nineveh;
... the temple of the goddess Ištar
their sons ...
8 mules:
I have heard that the king of Elam has sent his messenger to Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the eunuch of the king of Assyria, saying:
... minas of silver
... to the city of Akkad
Witness NN.
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), offspring of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, descendant of Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria —
The one who crushed the Barnaki, a dangerous enemy, who live in the land Tīl-Ašurri, which is called Pitānu in the language of the people of the city Miḫrānu;
... these ...
The king, my lord, should not say: "Why did you not write to me?" I have written to the king, my lord, ten times. The king, my lord, has not seen my messengers.
If the moon at its appearance wears a crown: the king will reach the highest rank. — It becomes visible on the 1st day.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send me the ... s of the cities of the country of Akkad that I had written to you about? Did you not see the ... of the cities of the country of Akkad that I had written to you about?" — I did not see them. The ... of the cities of the country of Akkad that I had written to the king, my lord, are in the hands of the prefects of the country of Akkad. They are in the hands of the prefects of the country of Akk
In the charge of Ahabû, commander-of-fifty.
... the 'finger' is abnormally small...
Good health to the king, my lord!
The Pleiades are (equivalent) to Saturn. Mars stands in the Pleiades.
... regular offerings
Witness Kusayu.
12 shekels of silver, capital, belonging to Zabayu, at the disposal of Zabayu, at the disposal of Bel-ibni, at the disposal of Nabû-na'id.
At that time, the temple of the goddess Ištar, mistress of the city Arbela, my mistress, which a former king had built — that temple had become dilapidated and I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I completely rebuilt that temple from top to bottom. I made it larger than before, raised its superstructure, and made it glisten like the stars (lit. “writing”) of the firmament. I made (it) as bright as day for the goddess Ištar, my mistress, and made (it) an object of
(As for) Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II), who had fled to me (and) grasped my feet, I brought him into the city Susa (and) I installed him as king. (vii 10') I placed a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over the citizens of the city Madaktu, a city that was a lordly residence of the land Elam, and (thus) I made (the land Elam) bow down to the yoke of my lordship. Ummanigaš, who had fled to me (and)
Witness Marduk-remanni, cohort commander.
1 house, 2 ...
1 bowl (of wine): his food.
an estate of 1 hectare 5 decares of land adjoining the road to Calah;
Adad-bessunu ...
3, in the charge of Banaya,
Month ... , 19th day, eponym year of Šarru-šarru-uṣur.
Bel-lu-balaṭ, ... ; NN, son of the palace scribe; 2 women; 2 daughters; 2 maids of theirs;
Ashur-da''inanni.
The tribute of the people of the land Ḫatti I received.
At that time, I made the enemy people whom I had captured carry baskets (of earth) and they made bricks.
... you
The base of the middle 'finger' of the lung is 'bound.'
The people of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari ... have not been submissive to the kings, my ancestors. They have not brought tribute and gifts to my forefathers.
10 ... ;
What else? What else?
Nabû-šumu-iddina ...
... this ...
The king's word to the commander-in-chief:
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
I have written to the scribes of the temples, but they have not agreed to come. I am waiting for them; as soon as they come, I shall send them to the king, my lord.
Witness Nabû'a.
Witness Šep-...
Witness NN. Witness Habil-Dada.
adjoining the side road of ... ,
... Zeru-ukin
1, the commander-in-chief of the left;
Adad-le'i, prefect;
there ...
Witness ... -Adad, ...
A tablet of Nabû-nadin-šumi to Nabû-zeru-lešir, his brother. Good health to my brother!
I built (and) completed (it) from its foundations to its crenellations. I deposited my monumental inscriptions.
Concerning the king's subjects who are in Hindanu, about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let them be brought here!" — I went and spoke with them, and they said: "... "
the goddess Ištar who ...
Perhaps ...
for one mina of silver
... the base of the middle 'finger' of the lung is 'loose.'
I marched to the land of the Manneans. I conquered the city Arbela, the fortified city of the land of the Manneans, together with cities in its environs. I massacred them (and) carried off captives from them. I conquered the city Ḫarḫar, a fortress of the land of the Manneans, together with cities in its environs. I massacred them (and) carried off captives from them. I conquered the city Paddiri, a fortress of the land of the Manneans,
Nabû-šumu-iddina, the šandabakku, has contracted and bought them for 1 1/2 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
... of Inurta-...
100 — the ...
... , Bel-eṭir son of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the chief eunuch, and his brothers, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, N
Witness Il-mananu, royal bodyguard.
The 'ear' is present. The 'station' is present. The 'path' is present. The 'well-being' is present. The 'path' on the left of the gall bladder is present. The 'weapon'-mark of the 'increment' rises towards the left. The upper part is elevated. The base of the middle part is 'loose.'
I have given out the corn rations, and I have also given out the straw and fodder. I have appointed a guard with them.
The scout to whom I gave the order has come back and told me: "I did not see (anything)."
... very
I will go ...
He shall give the sheep in Iyyar (II).
Marduk, Zarpanitu, the Lady of Akkad
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether these men or their sons or their grandsons or their brothers or their nephews or their prefect or their cohort commander or their labour-duty superior
... Kenî,
The 11th day.
and his people, ... ,
News of the Urarṭian: ... the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ...
Performed in Nisan (I).
As to what you wrote: "The king, my lord, should send a bodyguard to come and have a look at the fortresses of the Manneans which have been conquered by the Urarṭian" — the king, my lord, should not be afraid of the Manneans, who have been defeated by the Urarṭian. The Urarṭian is a strong king, who has defeated the Manneans, and the Manneans are afraid of him. The king, my lord, should not be afraid of the Manneans either. The king, my lord, should not be
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
At that time, in the reign of Aššur-... , my lord, the king, my lord, sent me to the land of the Lullumu. I conquered the city ...
... the king, my lord
Witness ... a, son of Bel-lu-dari.
Venus set in the east.
a ditto of olives; a basket of (mixed) fruit.
I have heard that he has gone to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, send word that he should be arrested ...
I have written to you; do not be negligent. You are to bring ... to the king, my lord. You are to bring ... to the king, my lord. You are to bring ... to the king, my lord. You are to bring ... to the king, my lord. You are to bring ... to the king, my lord. You are to bring ... to the king, my lord. You are to bring ... to the king, my lord.
... the son of Aššur-...
... their ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health  to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
1 whole sheep; 1 sheep of the temple.
A thigh, a shoulder, outer cuts;
At that time, I made the enemy people whom I had captured carry baskets (of earth) and they made bricks. I built (and) completed Esagil, the palace of the gods, an image of the apsû, and I filled (it) with splendor.
... the king, my lord,
Tiglath-pileser, strong king, conqueror of enemy regions, subduer of all princes,
to ...
(As for) Bēl-iqīša, the prelate of the city Gaza who had thrown off the yoke of the kings, my ancestors, and who had not bowed down to the kings, my ancestors, he bowed down to my yoke.
Witness Sama', ditto.
... the governor of Harran
The names of the sons of the king are:
a 2-seah jar of beer of bruised grain.
... the house of the treasurer in the house ...
... he is ...
... of NN came ...
with 30 women ...
... to the bed
Ashur-belu-usur,
... the king should ...
of the heart ...
The palace of Shalmaneser, great king, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), great king, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria: stone slab belonging to the house of the royal statue.
... the king, my lord
... of the town of Sariqina
to the bodyguard ...
... the troops ...
... the front red, of the country;
If Jupiter passes to the right of Regulus: the king of Akkad will exercise world dominion; the king of Akkad will rule all lands; the king of Akkad will capture his enemies; the king of Akkad will collect a substantial tribute; the king of Akkad will have no rival.
opposite ...
The ... of the king, my lord, is doing very well; the whole country is happy indeed. The king, my lord, can be glad indeed.
the king, my lord, ...
— On the 14th day the moon is seen together with the sun.
... the commanders-of-fifty of the archers
I am herewith sending to the king, my lord, the letter of Bel-eṭir which I sent to the Palace. The king, my lord, should read it, and the king, my lord, should do as he deems best.
until you ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "The son of Yakin has come to Assyria" — I have asked him about the news of Bit-Yakin, and he told me as follows:
500 (hectares) of arable land, 100 (hectares) under cultivation therein; 1 ox, 1 threshing-floor, 1 cistern for water; 1 house; 1 vegetable garden; 1 son; 1 woman; 1 daughter of 4 spans' height: a total of 6 people.
May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, question him.
The king, my lord, should send a royal eunuch to the commander-in-chief, and let him give orders to the prefects, so they will do the work.
Total 1,120 — on the 19th day.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
... to guard ...
2 'litres' of bread;
NN ...
Now, concerning the 1,000 horses of the Itu'eans about which you wrote, I have sent word, and they are bringing them.
... his people
... who ...
Seal of ... , owner of the women being sold.
Nabû-eriba, servant of Hanṭasanu —
who are with him ...
Witness ... -šarru-ibni.
I have written down the names of the towns and the fields which they have taken over and am herewith sending (this information) to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should know (this).
... to the king, my lord ... I have sent ... to the king, my lord.
On the 13th day the king went up to the House of God. He performed the sheep offerings before Aššur and Mullissu.
Witness Nabû-da''in-šarru, ditto.
Witness Mannu-lu-šulmu.
I had a palace of breccia, alabaster, elephant ivory, ebony, boxwood, musukkannu-wood, cedar, cypress, juniper, and elammaku-wood, (a palace that I named) Egalzagdinutukua (“The Palace Without a Rival”), constructed thereon as my royal residence.
in ...
... my father's house
The palace of Amēl-Marduk, the viceroy who provides for Ur, the one who renovates Eanna, the one who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods.
Month of Sivan (III), 1st day,
Aššur-rēša-iši, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-rabi (II), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Enlil-nārārī (II), (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur:
(As for) Hezekiah of the land Judah, who had not submitted to my yoke, I surrounded (and) conquered forty-six of his fortified walled cities and small(er) settlements in their environs, which were without number, by having ramps trodden down and battering rams brought up, the assault of foot soldiers, sapping, breaching, and siege engines. I brought out of them 200,150 people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen
The king, my lord, should know (this)...
shall place 10 minas of refined silver (and) one mina of pure gold in the lap of Ištar of Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owner. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
... I have sent my messenger to them, saying: "The king has sent me to  the people of Arrapha."
the exorcist ...
... to the house of Ḫar-duri in the city of ...
That which is (written) upon the throne at Nineveh, and (which) is in the possession of the god Nabû.
... the day ...
2 'litres' of midru-bread; 2 'litres' of spiced bread.
... the king, my lord, should know
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
Alternatively, if it is not convenient to perform the ritual in the morning, we shall perform it in the evening.
Of the 24th day: at the god's setting out.
On my eighth campaign, I marched against Dunānu, son of Bēl-iqīša, to the land Gambulu, which had put its trust in the king of the land Elam (and) had not bowed down to my yoke. With my mighty battle array, I covered the land Hamath to its full extent (and) I laid low like sheep  (v 15) the troops of the land Elam, his allies.
Concerning the captives about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me,
An estate of x hectares of land adjoining the road of Hašanu, adjoining the wadi, adjoining Nabû-... , adjoining the garden of Nabû-... , adjoining the garden of NN, adjoining the garden of NN, adjoining the garden of NN, adjoining the garden of NN, adjoining the garden of NN, adjoining the garden of NN, adjoining the garden of NN, adjoining the garden of NN, adjoining the garden of NN
When the king, my lord, ...
Nabû-duru-uṣur, a servant of NN, the ... of the king
... s
Witness Issar-šumu-iddina, scribe.
I have heard that the magnates are plotting to kill me. I am not afraid of death, but I am afraid of being deprived of the king's presence. May the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
I have written to the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
Ditto by Ištar, Lady of Nineveh! Ditto by Belet-ili, Lady of Arbela!
The heart of the ram is normal...
... one beams
Witness Gi...
He who erases my inscribed name and writes his (own) name or discards my monumental inscriptions: May the god Aššur, my lord, overthrow his sovereignty (and) destroy his name (and) his seed from the land.
... the house of the Lady of Nineveh ...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Issar-na'id or his sons, grandsons, brothers or nephews, or his prefect, or his cohort commander, or his neighbour, or his relative, or his labour-duty superior, or his prefect, or his cohort commander, or his neighbour, or his relative, or his labour-duty superior, or his prefect, or his cohort commander, or his neighbour, or his relative,
Witness Na'id-Adad.
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, and (then) I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, fortified cities, together with the small(er) settlements in their environs (and) the district of the land Bīt-Barrû in its entirety, and I added (
... the woman ...
... the lower earth ...
... of the day ... he made to rise ...
Witness Remut-ili.
The priest of the temple of Gula gives hand-water to the king.
... in Assyria ...
they placed ...
May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May they give you long days and everlasting years!
... about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me, ... the god Nabû, the goddess Tašmētu, the gods of heaven and earth, the gods of Assyria, the gods of Sumer and Akkad, the gods of the four quarters, ... the gods of the land of Elam, the gods of the land of Gambulu, the gods of the land of ... , the gods of the land of ... , the gods of the land of ... , the gods of the land of ... , the gods of the land of ... , the gods of the land of ... ,
... I have heard that he has gone to ... Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord.
... his sons
Nabû-na'id,
... to the presence of the king ...
Total, of the estate of Šulmu-ahhe, son of Zabdî.
to ...
The king, my lord, should send word that they should bring ... to the Palace. Let them ... the ... of the Palace. The king, my lord, should know (this) and be happy.
Urad-Nabû, son of Bel-eṭir, servant of Šamšī-Adad.
If a meteor flashes from the east to the west and sets: the main army of the enemy will fall.
Witness Šar-Issar, ...
1 talent of silver, 1 mina 1 1/2 shekels of silver, 1/3 mina of silver, 1/3 (of a mina) of gold, 1/3 (of a mina) of tin, 1/3 (of a mina) of bronze: all this is the tribute of the city of Kar-Tukulti-Ninurta.
By the command of the goddess Ištar, the lady of battle and war, I brought about their defeat inside (the city) Tīl-Tūba.
At that time, the temple of the goddess Ištar, mistress of the city Arbela, my mistress, which a former king had built — that temple had become dilapidated and I completely rebuilt it from top to bottom. I made it larger than before, raised its superstructure, and made it glisten like the stars (lit. “writing”) of the heavens. I made (it) as bright as day for the goddess Ištar, my mistress.
owner of the ... being sold.
Witness NN, cohort commander.
At that time, the temple of the goddess Ištar, mistress of the city Arbela, my mistress, which kings who preceded me had previously built — that temple had become dilapidated and I completely rebuilt it from top to bottom.
... outside ...
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why have you not sent an answer to my letter?" — I have sent an answer to the king, my lord, three or four times, but the messenger of the king, my lord, has not come to me. Now, if the king, my lord, really wants an answer to his letter, let him send a messenger to come and stay with me, and let me send him to the king, my lord. I have written to the king, my lord, (only) what I have observed. The king, my lord, should
40 homers of fodder, 40 homers of stored grain for soldiers, in all 80 homers a day —
Does your great divinity know it? Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
1, the 'residences' of the palace herald;
... him
The land of the Qutu is exempt.
... ni;
The coils of the colon are ... in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
a flagon of beer of bruised grain.
... the sun
Witness Šarru-emuranni, palace manager.
... I made him take an oath and put iron fetters on his hands and feet. I brought him to Assyria, ... I made him swear an oath by the great gods and I gave him back his land. I installed Tammarītu, his third brother, as king in the city Ḫidalu. (... ) I placed ... eunuchs of mine as provincial governors over the land Elam.
... the land of Sumer and Akkad
From Ašaredu the younger, son of Šamaš-šumu-ibni.
... his ... against him
Witness Adad-šumu-...
Total of the temple of Nabû of his city.
... on ...
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... 34 horses,
they have sent ...
Total, Aššur-natkil, village manager.
a total of 190 horses and 33 mules have come in today.
... my ...
... I have sent my messenger to greet the king, my lord.
... the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari ... I annexed to Assyria.
... the Urarṭian
From Issar-šumu-ereš.
we have ... ed our work.
... The left of the gall bladder is split. The middle surface of the 'finger' is split...
... ;
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nadin-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur, Sin, Šamaš, Bel, Nabû, Nergal and Ištar bless the king, my lord.
On my return march, I defeated all together the Tuʾumuna, Riḫiḫu, Yadaqqu, Ubudu, Gibrê, Malaḫu, Gurumu, Ubulu, Damunu, Gambulu, Ḫindaru, Ruʾuʾa, Puqudu, Ḫamrānu, Ḫagarānu, Nabatu, (and) Liʾtaʾu, insubmissive Arameans.
of the king ...
Witness Adad-naṣir, ...
Taboo of Aššur, my god, (and) Sîn, who dwells in Ḫarrān.
... the king, my lord
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
Witness Nabû-...
... there is
The king's word to NN: I am well; you can be glad.
3 bags of sesame;
Witness Isanayu.
... to Merodach-Baladan
NN and his people, ... ,
(As for) the governors, the nobles, and the people of the city Ekron who had thrown Padî, their king who was bound by treaty and oaths to Assyria, into iron fetters and who had handed him over to Hezekiah of the land Judah in a hostile manner, they became frightened on account of the villainous acts they had committed. They formed a confederation with the kings of Egypt (and) the archers, chariots, (and) horses of the king of the land Meluḫḫa, forces without number, and they came to
the mouth ...
The 20th day, when the king ... , is when he ... ed the ... of the king, my lord.
... I brought out and I counted (them) as booty. I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire the cities ... , ... , (and) ... , cities of the land Bīt-Agusi, which are in the district of the land Ḫatti.
Bel-duri, farmer; 1 son; 1 woman; 100 (hectares) of arable land in the village of the Farmer.
To the god Marduk, great lord, his lord: Nabû-šuma-iškun, the governor of the city Samaria, presented (this object) for the sake of his life.
... Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it? Does your great divinity know it?
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
On my eighth campaign, I marched against Dunānu, son of Bēl-iqīša, to the land Gambulu, which had put its trust in the king of the land Elam (and) had not bowed down to my yoke. With my mighty battle array, I covered the land Hamath to its full extent (and) I laid low like sheep  (v 10) the troops of the land Elam, his allies.
Witness NN, scribe.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
... of ...
(As for) the city Milqīʾa, which is situated at the foot of Mount Ḫašmar, a rugged mountain, and which had not bowed down to the yoke of the kings, my ancestors, it was the home of the goddess Ištar, mistress of the lands, the lady of battle and war, the one who incites fighting, the one who goes at the side of the king who reveres her, (and) the one who marches at his side in battle. At the foot of Mount Ḫašmar, I conquered
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: reliable speech; the land will become happy.
When in Arbela, the king ...
Dayyan-Inurta,
And ... the news of the son of Yakin: he is in Babylon.
Witness Riba-ahhe.
Month of Šakināte, eponymy of Nabû-šar-aḫḫēšu.
of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, ...
Disregard what happens after my stipulated term...
From Balasî.
... who ... , saying: "... I am a servant of Aššur. Let me do the work of Aššur in ... "
I have sent my army to you; do not be negligent but ... the ... of the country ... the troops ...
Perhaps my lord will say: "Why did you not write to me?" I have written to my lord ...
May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May they give you long days and everlasting years!
Zar-Issar, son of Ahu'a, ...
... the city ...
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria: property of the temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh.
... from ...
Total x persons, at the disposal of Kiṣir-... , the merchant.
Witness Šumma-Adad, witness Ahu-nuri.
... son of Yakīn-Lû, ditto (governor of the city Carchemish), descendant of Puzur-Aššur (III), governor of the city Ḫindānu, one of an enduring lineage,
10 homers of barley according to the seah of 9 'litres' belonging to the chief of granaries, at the disposal of Dadî, the village manager of the chief of granaries, at the disposal of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the deputy village manager of the chief of granaries, at the disposal of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the deputy village manager of the chief of granaries, at the disposal of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the deputy village manager of the chief of gran
The palace of Shalmaneser, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (I), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur: ...
Witness Šep-Issar, servant of the governor of Arbela.
... who ... to the city ... , saying: "... to the city ... ; if you do not believe me, ... the gods Aššur, Šamaš, Bel and Nabû will punish you."
Concerning their ...
I received gold (and) shining silver sling straps as their wrist-trappings (and) slashed off their belts with sharp swords. I took away gold (and) silver (decorated) belt-daggers as their waist-trappings.
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, chariot driver.
... is good
The coils of the colon are 16 in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
... of the bed
The king of Babylon, the king of the land Elam, the king of the land Gambulu, the king of the land ... , the king of the land Bīt-Yakīn, the king of the land Bīt-Šilāni, the king of the land Bīt-Zualzaš, the king of the land Bīt-Marduk, the king of the land Bīt-Amukāni, the king of the land Bīt-Šaʾalli, the king of the land Bīt-Imbî,
... the base of the 'station' ...
The 'station' is present. The 'path' ... on the left of the gall bladder ...
a cup of quinces;
10 talents 17 minas of ... ;
— Jupiter stood there one month over its period.
... Basu'a and ...
Puzur-Aššur, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-nārārī (I), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Išme-Dagan (II) (who was) also vice-regent of the god Aššur:
NN, son of ...
3 ... ;
I enlarged the site of Nineveh, my capital city. I broadened its squares and brought light into the alleys and streets, making (them) as bright as day. I had an inner (and) outer wall built and I raised (them) as high as mountain(s).
The 'strength' is absent.
I joyfully entered his palace, which is in Babylon, then I opened his treasury and brought out gold, silver, gold (and) silver utensils, precious stones, all kinds of possessions (and) property without number, a substantial tribute, (together with) his palace women, courtiers, attendants, male singers, female singers, all of the craftsmen, as many as there were, (and) his palace attendants, and I counted (them) as booty.
The one who crushed the Barnaki, a dangerous enemy, ... the land of the Šubaru.
The sheep are his blood. The wine is his tears.
And now, if you do not believe (them), do not be negligent about your guard.
I have written to you, I have not written to the Palace. Let them give me the horses that the king, my lord, sent me, and I will go and do the king's work.
I have sent my messenger to him.
The palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of Assyria: (brick) belonging to the facing of the temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, which is before the courtyard of the temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, which is within the city of Kalḫu. I made (it) for my life, the lengthening of my days, the securing of my reign, the well-being of my seed, the safeguarding of the throne
After the king had gone out of the palace, the king entered the courtyard of the palace. The king stopped at the entrance of the courtyard and remained standing. The king took the hand of the goddess Ištar, brought her into the courtyard, and remained standing. The king took the hand of the goddess Ištar, brought her into the courtyard, and remained standing. The king took the hand of the goddess Ištar, brought her into the courtyard, and remained standing.
Witness Habil-ken.
The troops of the Assyrians have set out towards the city ...
... to the king ...
... they are transporting
I settled them in a pleasant abode inside my town Āl-gabbāri-bānî. I provided them with gardens, a swimming pool, (and) a place to rest. I gave them fruit trees, olive trees, (and) aromatic trees. I had a stele made, had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over them written on it, and I erected (it) in (that) town.
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
a basket of (mixed) fruit.
Zizî;
... the chief of accounts
An estate of 50 hectares of land adjoining Mannu-ki-Arbail;
from the 20th of the month ...
... I have sent ... to them, saying: "... your ... and your ... s, and ... the horses of the king of Assyria, which are with you, and ... the king's servants who are with you."
... which ...
... of the son of Yakin
... I have ... ed his ... and given ... to the people of ... ; now then ...
If Venus disappears in the east in the month of Sivan (III) from the 1st to the 30th day: there will be wailings in the land.
of the days ...
I appointed one eunuch of mine, Aššur-daʾʾinanni, as provincial governor over them. I set up the weapon of (the god) Aššur, my lord, therein and strengthened its garrison more than before. I settled therein the people of (foreign) lands conquered by me, (and) the people of the land Bīt-Yakīn, which I had conquered. I placed (them) under the authority of a eunuch of mine, the governor of the city Arrapḫa.
... the forts of the king, my lord
To the king, my lord: your servant Gabbu-ana-Aššur.
Land of the Palace Herald
all the archers ...
Witness ... ayu.
... Aššur-šezib, Babylon
1 seah 1 'litre' of regular offering loaves;
... Venus is the star of the crown prince.
Nergal-remanni, his wife, 2 sons of his, ... of his daughter,
adjoining the house of Abi-ul-idi, farmer of the village of Inurta,
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Month Iyyar (II), 5th day, eponym year of Abi-lešir.
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
The verdict of the goddess Ištar:
Witness Nabû-zeru-lešir.
To the king, my lord: your servant Mannu-ki-Libbali. Good health to the king, my lord! The land of the king my lord is well.
From the beginning I have been a dog who loves his lord. I have run about in the house of my lord, licking the feet of my lord. I have run about in the house of my lord, licking the feet of my lord.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, (or) changed or altered the proceedings...
... the Itu'eans
let them be ...
20 sheep, 20 spring lambs,
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: good for Akkad, bad for Elam and the Westland.
... who had not bowed down to the yoke of Aššur, my lord, ... the land Ellipi, which is in the midst of the sea, ... the land Bīt-Adini, which is in the swamps and marshes, ... the land Bīt-Amukāni, which is in the desert, ... the land Bīt-Šilāni, which is in the mountains, ... the land Bīt-Zualzaš, which is in the steppe, ... the land Bīt-Matti, which is in the highlands
The palace of the king, my lord, ... ; I have not yet finished the work ... The king, my lord, ...
I have written to you; do not be negligent. Let your guard be strong.
The king, my lord, should send a bodyguard to them, so they will do the work and deliver it to the king, my lord. They are not delivering it to me, nor are they doing the work. They are just waiting for me, saying: "When will he come and settle our case with him?"
I have not seen a single letter of the king, my lord, concerning the work of the city wall. The king, my lord, should ask the governor of Calah whether or not I have sent ... to the king, my lord.
... the king, your lord, ...
The men who were given to the prefects have not been given to the prefects of the cohort commanders. The prefects of the cohort commanders are not able to go out and to do the king's work.
From Inurta-kenu-uṣur, the scribe.
I sent a eunuch of mine, the chief eunuch, to the city Tyre. I received from Metenna of the city Tyre 150 talents of gold (and) 2,000 talents of silver as his  audience gift.
... , in all 2,
... mina(s) ...
I prayed to the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Šarrat-Kidmuri, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Nergal, (and) Nusku, the gods who support me, (v 15) ... and they accepted my prayers. In the month Ulūlu (VI), the month of the god Sîn, the light of the gods, I mustered my troops. I took the direct road against Um
... upon
He is in the presence of Aššur-killanni.
Care of Nabû-naṣir, the ...
one of them ...
When the king, my lord, sent me to the magnates, I said to them as follows: "The king has given me the order: 'Go and bring the booty from the land of Tabal to Assyria.'"
Witness Issar-tariba.
If an eclipse begins in the north and clears in the south: the king of Akkad will rule the land wherever he turns.
Moreover, Abī-Yateʾ, son of Teʾri, came to Nineveh and kissed my feet. I concluded a treaty with him to do obeisance to me. I installed him as king in place of Iautaʾ. (iii 10') I imposed upon him gold, eyestones, pappardilû-stone, kohl, camels, (and) prime quality donkeys as annual payment.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
... the people of Assyria ...
The palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of Assyria: (brick) belonging to the facing of the well of the temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh.
1,800 (homers of) barley, 1,200 (homers of) wheat, 1,000 (homers of) sesame oil, 1,000 (homers of) cress, 1,000 (homers of) ... , 1,000 (homers of) kudimmu salt, 1,000 (homers of) ... , 1,000 (homers of) ... , 1,000 (homers of) ... , 1,
The middle of the 'station' is effaced ...
... ;
... Dadî,
... Ahu-duri
... the 'path' is curled.
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Eltekeh (and) Tamnâ. I approached the city Ekron and I killed the governors (and) nobles who had committed crime(s) and hung their corpses on towers around the city; I counted the citizens who had committed the criminal acts as booty; (and) I commanded that the rest of them, (those) who were not guilty of crimes or wrongdoing, (to) whom no penalty was due, be allowed to go free.
Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, has contracted and bought them from Šamaš-belu-uṣur for 1 1/2 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
1 house, 1 vegetable garden, ... , a house, 1 threshing-floor, 1 orchard;
I am the Lady of Kidmuri, the great lady.
2 blankets,
Witness ... -abu-uṣur, scribe of the city of ...
Month Elul (VI), 3rd day.
Now then I am sending to the king, my lord, three messengers of mine who are in the service of the king of Elam. They are bringing with them three horses.
The king, my lord, can be glad indeed. The king, my lord, will live to old age. The king, my lord, will see the grandchildren of his sons grow up.
In the future, in days to come, may a later prince, when that wall becomes old and dilapidated, restore it. May he restore my inscribed name to its place. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers. May he return my clay cone to its place. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers. May he return my clay cone to its place. May he restore my inscribed name to its place. May he restore my clay cone to its place. May he restore my clay cone to its place. May he restore my clay cone to its
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ra'im-nišešu. May Aššur, Šamaš, Bel and Nabû give the king, my lord, long days and everlasting years.
I have heard that they have ... ed a boat on the river bank, saying: "... " They have not yet finished it, (but) have already started to tow it. The king, my lord, should know (this).
I have sent my messenger to ... , but they have not agreed to bring the men to me. They are transporting the logs to the river bank, and are building their houses.
... you should not go
I conquered the lands Bīt-Kapsi, Bīt-Sangi, Bīt-Urzakki, Media (lit. “land of the Medes”), Bīt-Zualzaš, Bīt-Matti, (and) Tupliaš; I captured alive the king of the land Elam, (iv 10) (and) I counted his wives, his sons, his daughters, his (palace) women, male singers, (and) female singers as booty. I conquered the city Bīt-I
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
As to the merchants about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "They should come to Dur-Šarruken" — they have come, but they have not yet arrived.
... 1/2 'litre';
The 'well-being' is present. The left side of the gall bladder is attached. The base of the middle part is 'loose.'
Witness NN, ... of Hatarakka. Witness NN.
Bel-dan,
... you have sent ...
... to them ...
He brought before me his daughter, his own offspring, and the daughter(s) of his brothers to serve as housekeepers. He brought his son, who had never crossed the sea, to do obeisance to me. I received from him his daughter and the daughter(s) of his brothers, together with a large marriage gift. I had mercy on him and (then) I gave (his) son, his offspring, back to him.
From Ašaredu the older.
... the king, our lord, ...
I have written down the names of the ... s who have come to me from ... , and am herewith sending them to the king, my lord.
... the priest of Šamaš ...
Witness NN.
... the deputy
When the chief eunuch, my lord, was in Calah, I sent my messenger to him, saying: "The king has given me orders: 'If you hear of a matter concerning the palace, you must tell it to the chief eunuch.'" He did not tell me anything, but said: "I have heard nothing." I sent my messenger to him again, saying: "The king has given me orders: 'If you hear of a matter concerning the palace, you must tell it to the chief eunuch.'"
... The heart of the ram is normal...
adjoining the field of Šulmu-beli, ...
... ;
the house of ...
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), offspring of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, descendant of Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria — (5) the one who (re)constructed the temple of the god Aššur, (re)built Esagil and Babylon, renewed the statues of the great gods,
To the king, my lord: your servant Bel-le'i. Good health to the king, my lord!
or ...
The god Adad, the canal inspector of heaven and earth, the canal inspector of heaven and earth, the canal inspector of heaven and earth, the canal inspector of heaven and earth, the canal inspector of heaven and earth, the canal inspector of heaven and earth, the canal inspector of heaven and earth, the canal inspector of heaven and earth, the canal inspector of heaven and earth, the canal inspector of heaven and earth, the canal inspector of heaven and earth, the canal inspector of heaven and earth, the canal inspector of heaven and earth, the canal inspector of heaven
To Aššur-iddina, the ...
Witness Šulmu-šarri.
1 bag of sesame; 6 ditto of kernels.
5 ... -horses,
Witness Tuqunu-ereš, merchant.
I crossed the Euphrates in flood (and) marched to the land Ḫatti. I conquered the cities of the land Ḫatti (Syria-Palestine) which had not submitted to me (and) which had not been submissive to my yoke. I carried off their booty, possessions, (and) property. I conquered the cities of the land Ḫatti (Syria-Palestine) which had not submitted to me (and) which had not been submissive to my yoke. I carried off their booty
Witness Banî, deputy of the chief physician.
eponym year of Arbailayu, treasurer.
Witness Ubru-Nabû, deputy of the team-commander.
... you
the ...
Witness Mannu-ki-Aššur, ditto.
he is a son of NN
... and
Whoever ... , the merchant ...
The breast-bone is thick. The heart of the ram is normal...
... of the sky
102 cavalrymen, 102 grooms, 102 armourers, in all 304 men,
a 2-seah jar of Assyrian budê-confection;
... I have sent
... I have written to my lord.
... 5 ironsmiths
... the ... s
Total 2: the palace herald.
... to the king ...
... my country
I have sent ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... the town of Qarqar, which is on the border
x houses in the town of Haba-saggil;
... s of Elam ...
... the wine that from ...
If a meteor flashes from the east to the west and sets: the main army of the enemy will fall.
The king, my lord, should ask the chief of granaries whether or not he has given out corn rations. If he has not given out, the king, my lord, should know (this).
... &  beer  &  Ahu-ušabši
Moreover, breccia, as much as is needed (for making) burzigallu-bowls, (a stone) that had never been seen before, (vi 10) (and) that was worth 10 shekels of silver,
This was the report of La-qepu.
Witness Nanî, ditto.
And concerning the bile which he purged, it is good that you wrote and informed me.
or the ... , or the confectioners, or the cooks, or the bakers, or the brewers, or the boatmen, or the reed-workers,
total, the ... s.
... of ...
... Why did he ... ?
The gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela, the gods who support me, rendered a just verdict for me concerning Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II). Tammarītu rebelled against him and struck him, together with his family, down with the sword. Tammarītu, who was (even) more insolent than Ummanigaš, sat on the throne of the land Elam.
the towns of the Itu'eans ...
Witness Kunaya, eunuch of ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Issar-šumu-ereš. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I have also heard that they have been selling the horses of the royal bodyguard for money. I have written to the Palace about them.
A tablet of Nabû-zeru-lešir to Nabû-ibni, his lord. Good health to my lord! May Bel and Nabû bless my lord.
1 hectare 4 decares of orchard in the village of Abi-ul-idi, adjoining the orchard of Nuhšaya.
The land of Bit-Zamani.
2 seahs, the 21st day;
of the palace herald.
... they have been plotting inside it
The servants of Bel-ahhe-eriba, the king's servant, have been sold for money. The king, my lord, should ask the ... s of the Palace. They know the story. The ... of the king, my lord, ...
I took the city Elenzaš as a royal city and a fortress for that district, then I changed its former name and called it Kār-Sennacherib. I settled therein the people of the lands that I had conquered. I placed (it) under the authority of a eunuch of mine, the governor of the city Ḫarḫar, and (thus) enlarged my land.
I brought out the goddess Ištar, mistress of the city Arbela, from her temple, which is inside (the city) Arbela, and I set (her) on a throne (made) of gold, (which is) befitting her divinity, and I installed (her) in the city Tušḫa. I offered before her large prize bulls (and) fattened sheep as pure food offerings.
Ashur-deni-amur,
Witness Šamaš-ahu-iddina, physician.
a cup of small onions; a ditto of quinces;
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, question him.
The upper part extends beyond the surface of the right lung. The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 16 in number. Check-up...
... he will return
Samarra
Month Iyyar (II), 15th day, eponym year of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, governor of Marqasa.
As to what you wrote: "A messenger of Urpala'a came to me for an audience with the Phrygian messenger" — let him come, and let Aššur, Šamaš, Bel and Nabû command that all these kings should wipe your sandals with their beards! May Aššur, Šamaš, Bel and Nabû give you a just sceptre and an everlasting throne, and may they make your name and seed as secure as the foundation of a mountain!
NN, a citizen of Babylon, has written to me: "The king has sent a messenger to me."
4 (of) the "House of the Bedroom,"
From Bel-šuma-iškun.
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord.
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-reṣuwa. Good health to the king, my lord!
Sin-na'id, the ... of the crown prince, and NN, the son of the crown prince, have come to me, saying: "The men of Sin-na'id are ... "
before ...
May the goddess Ištar, mistress of battle and war, smash his bow in the thick of battle and have him crouch under his enemy.
11 houses ...
the governor ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send an answer to my letter?" —
... he shall not give back. Whoever breaks the contract, shall pay 10 minas of silver.
An estate of 2 hectares of land, 1 vineyard, 1 vegetable garden,
what I heard ...
Witness Nergal-apil-kumu'a, ...
... the king should not say: "Why did you not ... the ... of the city of ... ?"
strong ...
The mayor of Calah has written to the deputy (governor) that they should bring the king's subjects here.
... which they throw ... , is Marduk, who ... and threw ...
May Aššur, Bel, Nabû, ... , and the gods of heaven and earth turn over the tables of the king, my lord, and may they make your ... s go backwards.
I sent ...
Witness NN, boatman of the Arameans.
Seal of Sasî, owner of the ... being sold.
I built (and) completed a palace in the city Tarbiṣu as the residence of Ashurbanipal, the senior son of the king, who (resides in) the House of Succession.
Ululayu, his wife, 2 sons, total 4;
... the temple of Anu
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
The palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of Assyria: (brick) belonging to the facing of the temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh. Whoever erases my inscribed name (or) places (it) in the service of a god (or another) person, may the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Adad, ... make his name (and) his seed disappear.
To the 'farmer,' my lord: your servant, Aššur-hamatu'a. Good health to the 'farmer,' my lord. May Aššur, Ištar, and Marduk bless the 'farmer,' my lord. May they give ... to the 'farmer,' my lord.
Aššur-reši-išši, my lord, is a just king. May Aššur, Bel and Nabû bless my lord!
... him ...
... to the son of ...
you shall ... before ...
... The coils of the colon are 14 in number...
The money is paid completely. That field is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
I set Šarru-lū-dāri, son of Rūkibtu, their former king, over the people of the city Ashkelon and imposed upon him the payment of tribute (and) gifts (in recognition) of my overlordship so that he (now) pulls my yoke.
Disregard that the subject of this query, Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, ...
When the god Aššur, the great lord, entrusted me with the lordship of the lands, he gave me the four quarters (of the world) and I subdued all of the rebellious and insubmissive (people) from the Upper Sea to the Lower Sea. I made them bow down at my feet and they (now) pull my yoke.
... in your houses
A hat, a scarf, a bowl (of wine): his food master.
... the vizier
Total, of the son of Yakin, chief eunuch of the crown prince.
The commander-in-chief of the palace herald has given 50 sheep to the servants of the palace herald, and has appointed them as  shepherds.
Witness NN, ... of the river.
of ... ya.
... of the city ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ... , which ...
... of the servant who ...
... and his people
Adad-nārārī (III),
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired.
Witness Dadî, ditto.
The 'well-being' is present. The 'cap' rides upon the 'outside.'
x minas of silver, ... of the merchant.
Witness Šamaš-šallim, chariot driver.
If the moon is surrounded by a halo and the sun stands in it: the king of the land will be shut up.
I have sent my messenger to the city of Assur, and he has gone to meet him. As soon as he comes back, I shall write to the king, my lord, whatever news there is.
... , (ditto) from Aššur;
On the 29th day ... the god ... came out of the temple ...
... the elders
If Jupiter becomes visible in the path of the Anu stars: the king will become strong and have no rival.
And the city of Akkad which is in the district of ...
Moreover, (as for) Ṣidqâ, the king of the city Ashkelon who had not bowed down to my yoke, I forcibly removed the gods of his father’s house, himself, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his brothers, (and other) offspring of his father’s house and took him to Assyria.
And concerning the ritual about which I spoke to the king, my lord, it is said as follows: "If a man has committed a crime and his accomplice has taken to his defence, the king will punish the accomplice."
I have now written to you; do not be negligent but keep watch over them.
15, Bel-ereš;
... about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "What is the news about them?"
I have sent my messenger to greet the king, my lord.
... to the presence ...
... the city of Arrapha ... I built (and) completed (it) from its foundations to its crenellations. I brought the goddess Ištar, mistress of the city of Arrapha, out of Eanna (and) made (her) enter into Eanna.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Nabû-šarru-uṣur or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or his prefect or his cohort commander or his labour-duty superior,
Concerning the substitute king about whom my lord wrote to me,
... I have sent ... to you; ...
I built (and) completed Esabad, the temple of the goddess Gula that is inside Babylon, from its foundations to its crenellations. I made (it) shine like daylight. I made (it) as bright as day for the goddess Gula, my lady.
Witness Marduk-šumu-iddina, son of Ilu-šumu-ibni, scribe.
From Nergal-eṭir.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "What is the news of the Mannean?" — I have heard that he has entered Mannea.
The king's word to the commanders-of-fifty and the prefects of the cavalry: I am well; you can be glad.
If a planet comes close to Regulus: the king of Akkad will die, and his son will seize the throne; the king of Elam will die, and his son will seize the throne; the king of Gaza will die, and his son will seize the throne; the king of Babylon will die, and his son will seize the throne; the king of the Westland will die, and his son will seize the throne.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
saying: "...
Witness Bel-...
Witness Nabû-bani, ditto. Witness Nabû-šezib, ditto.
Mitinti of the land Ashkelon ... I brought him to Assyria. I set up ... in the land Ashkelon. I brought out ... , his wife, his sons, his daughters, his ... , his property, his possessions, ... I set up ... in the land Ashkelon. I brought out ... , his wife, his sons, his daughters, his ... , his property, his possessions, ... I set up ... in the land Ashkelon.
... have been done
This is its interpretation.
and the ground beneath him
I brought Dunānu (and) his brothers out of that city alive. I brought out his wife, his sons, his daughters, his (palace) women, male singers, (and) female singers and I counted (them) as booty. I brought out silver, gold, property, (and) the treasures of his palace and I counted (them) as booty. I brought out eunuchs, his attendants, engineers, (and) his food preparers and I counted (them) as booty. I brought out all of (his) artisans
If the moon at its appearance stands in a stable position: the days of the ruler will be long; the land will become happy.
And now, when the whole country heard that Nabû-šumu-lešir had been killed, it was not the whole country but only a few men who said: "He was a friend of ours, he was one who revered the king, our lord."
1 prayer bowl ditto;
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May they give happiness and physical well-being to the king, my lord! May they grant the king, my lord, the satisfaction of old age, extreme old age!
Witness NN, chief cook.
1,000 (homers) of barley ...
Inurta-ila'i, gardener; 1 woman; 1 daughter, of 4 spans' height: a total of 3 people.
This night, the moon was surrounded by a halo ... the moon ...
at the disposal of Ereš-Issar.
10 ditto, hallam;
Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II), the king of the land Elam, heard about the entry of my troops, who had entered inside the land Elam; he abandoned the city Madaktu, a royal city of his, and (then) fled and took to the mountains (lit. “ascended his mountain”).
May the king, my lord, send (word) to the palace supervisor that he should be punished.
... you did not give
2 hectares of field in the town of Dannaya, adjoining the field of the priest of Calah, adjoining the field of the scribe,
If the top of the left surface of the 'finger' is split: defeat. Revolt of the army. The enemy will plunder in the land.
... silver, gold, ... , ... , linen garments with multi-colored trim, ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ...
Witness Šulmu-ahhe, ditto.
Month Elul (VI), 20th day, eponym year of Sennacherib, king of Assyria.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
... I have sent ... to the king, my lord, in the hands of my messenger.
... he will rule
Witness Ṭab-šar-Nabû, scribe.
... of Uruk ...
... he ...
1 piece of ablution cloth, 1 ditto of saggilmud-stone, 1 ditto of carnelian;
the town of Minu...
The king, my lord, should know (this).
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments ...
You shall not ... with Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, concerning whom he has concluded (this) treaty with you, but shall bring him into the treaty and oath, and swear to him as follows:
Witness Nergal-ahu-uṣur, commander-of-fifty of ...
As to what I wrote to ...
... the house of ...
3,000 sheep, 100 oxen,
the governor ...
... the king, my lord
... of the king ...
1 hectare, ditto, of the town of Abunu;
I completed the work on Esagil which my father who had engendered me had not finished. I clad its walls with gold (and) silver and made (them) shine like daylight. I fastened band(s) of silver on tall columns (and) I erected (them) at the Gate of the Abundance of the Lands. I made (the god) Aššur, the great lord, enter into Ešarra and made (him) reside on (his) eternal dais. I offered sumptuous offerings before him and presented (him)
The son of Yakin has come to greet his father.
... -ibni
... of the land of Akkad ... I built (and) completed.
10 ... ;
... the governors of the land of Akkad
He has seized the house of my lord and given it to the son of Aššur-remanni. The king, my lord, should know (this).
The wax for the steles should be good. The steles should be made in the month of Tammuz (IV).
of Taurus ...
... my hand ...
5 shekels — the grand vizier, the palace superintendent;
... the gods of the lands ... , the gods of Assyria, the gods of Akkad, the gods of Sumer and Akkad, the gods of the four quarters, ... the goddesses ... , the great gods of heaven and earth, ...
... of Marduk-šumu-uṣur, the crown prince
The king, my lord, should not say: "Why did you not write to me?" I have written to the king, my lord, three or four times, but have seen no answer. Now, in desperation, I have written to the king, my lord.
The king, my lord, should give orders to the merchants who go to the  Inner City: they should bring the barley and the straw there.
... of the land of the Arabs, which is in the midst of the land of the land of the Nabayateans, ... against them ...
Moreover, I struck with the sword Teušpa, a Cimmerian, a barbarian whose home is remote, together with his entire army, in the territory of the land Ḫubušna.
... I conquered the city ... I carried off their booty, possessions, (and) property, (and) brought (them) to my city Aššur.
I have heard that they are building a fort in the town of Ṣabu-damqu. They have brought ... horses and mules from the  town of ... , and are bringing more horses and mules from the town of Ṣabu-damqu.
The palace of Aššur-nādin-aḫḫē, king of the universe.
The palace of Aššur-dān, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tiglath-pileser (I), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (I) (who was) also king of the universe (and) king of Assyria: (brick) belonging to the facing of the well of the temple of the god Adad.
adjoining the field of NN,
... I have sent ... to the city of Akkad.
I sent ...
Witness Ninuayu, ...
because of ...
Total 19 gods of the house of Ninurta.
Witness Abunu.
a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
The money is paid completely. That field is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
NN, royal bodyguard;
He shall pay in Iyyar (II). If he does not pay, it will increase by a fourth.
From Nabû-šuma-iškun.
Total, of Bit-Yakin.
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
Witness Ilu-le'i, cavalryman.
On my return march, I defeated all together the Tuʾumuna, Riḫiḫu, Yadaqqu, Ubudu, Gibrê, Malaḫu, Gurumu, Ubulu, Damunu, Gambulu, Ḫindaru, Ruʾuʾa, Puqudu, Ḫamrānu, Ḫagarānu, Nabatu, (and) Liʾtaʾu, insubmissive Arameans. I carried off into Assyria a substantial booty (consisting of
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May the great gods bestow long days, well-being and joy upon the king, my lord!
... Aššur-šumu-kinni
May a later prince restore it (and) return my inscribed name to its place. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
Shalmaneser, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur: builder of the temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, his mistress.
... wrote to me
If the Frond star comes close to the moon: there will be hostility in the land; the king will be angry with his nobles; the king will be angry with his country.
and the message ...
Witness Azi-... , ...
Nabû-šezib, the king of the land Elam, heard about the conquest of his cities and fear fell upon him. He brought (the people of) the rest of his cities into fortresses. He abandoned the city Madaktu, his royal city, and took the road to the city Ḫaydala, which is in the distant mountains. The people of the land Elam, who had fled before my weapons, came down from the mountains and submitted to me. I imposed upon them tribute and impost.
5 minas of silver, 5 togas, 5 tunics, 5 potfuls of iced fish, 5 creels with 100 fish, all tribute; the Palace Superintendent;
If you should sin against this treaty of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, concerning Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, concerning his brothers, sons by the same mother as Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, concerning the other sons of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, concerning Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, concerning his brothers, sons by the same mother as Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, concerning the other sons of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria
May the gods of Assyria and Babylonia give long days, everlasting years, happiness, and good health to the king, my lord!
1 talent of ... for 2 ...
Total 6 witnesses from the village of Babilayu.
Total, 40 horses, 20 mules ... , 20 silver ...
The bodyguard whom the governor of Mazamua sent to the deputy (governor) of Raṣappa, saying: "Go and bring him out!" —
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-šar-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord!
they are eating ...
which Adad-...
... I have sent my messenger to the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
... they should come
He said: "I have heard that ...
The people of the country ...
The money is paid completely. That field is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The temples of the land of Sumer and Akkad are well; the king, my lord, can be glad.
the king's bodyguard ...
If the king, my lord, so orders, I shall send word and they will bring them to the king, my lord.
... the son of Zeru-ibni
... , governor of ... ;
... concerning the ...
The 'cavity' of the left lung is split...
The 29th day: let him kill a snake: he will reach the highest rank.
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-alik-pani. Good health to the king, my lord!
As to what you wrote: "I have heard that you are going to the land of Akkad" — why would I not go to the land of Akkad? I am going to the land of Akkad because of the treaty of the king, my lord. I have written to the king, my lord, that the king of Elam is mobilizing troops.
2 cuts of shoulder, of an ox of the temple of Dagan;
Abu (V), twenty-fifth day, eponymy of Aḫu-dūr-enši.
... s of Nabû-ahhe-šallim, chief ...
Sennacherib, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, I:
The breast-bone is thick...
Šulmu-beli-ahhe,
... from the beginning of the day ...
... I marched against him. I conquered the city ... , his royal city. I carried off ... together with their possessions, the property of his palace, ... , his royal bed, his royal couch, ... , his palace women, his sons, his daughters, his property, ... , his gods, his goddesses, his possessions, ... I burnt, razed, (and) destroyed.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
3 (cuts of) meat, kirrutu-meal;
Witness Šarru-lu-dari.
In a favorable month, on a propitious day, I built great palatial halls upon that terrace for my lordly residence. I built a great (royal) house ninety-five large cubits long (and) thirty-one large cubits wide, (v 10) something none of the kings of the past (who came) before me had done. I roofed it with magnificent cedar beams. I fastened bands of silver and copper on doors of cypress, whose fragrance is sweet, and installed (them) in its gates.
in the city ...
shall place 10 minas of silver (and) one mina of gold in the lap of Ištar of Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
a total of 90 horses and 30 mules, all together 120 horses and mules, which NN brought in today.
with the land ...
Witness NN, scribe of the crown prince.
To the goddess Ištar, the lady of war and battle, the one who goes at the side of the king, her favorite, the one who lays low the enemy of the king, the one who opens springs, the one who walks the wide underworld, the one who dwells in Eanna, the one who resides in Arbela, the one who is clothed in fire, the one who is clothed in awe-inspiring radiance, the one who wears a crown of awe-inspiring radiance, the one who holds the bow, the
... -iddina, son of Nabû-uṣalla, son of ... , descendant of ... , ... of the city of Borsippa, ... of the city of Borsippa, ...
... this ...
NN, 1 ox, 20 sheep;
The gods of the house of Aššur of the New Palace.
(As for) the one who destroys an inscribed object bearing my name, the praise of my heroism, (and) the deeds that I have done, may the gods who reside in heaven and netherworld angrily curse him, overthrow  his kingship, (and) make his name (and) seed disappear from the land.
... to the prelate
The servants of Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, have contracted and bought them from Šumma-ilani for 20 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
2 minas of silver, the (governor) of Isana.
they have ... ed the ... of the Elamite(s)
of the fort ...
17 homers of sesame oil;
Witness Tabalayu, ša šēpi guard.
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, and (then) I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, fortified cities, together with the small(er) settlements in their environs (and) the district of the land Bīt-Barrû in its entirety, and I added (
The 'station' and 'path' are present.
... in the river Orontes/Euphrates ...
If the king, my lord, commands, I will send the bodyguard to the king, my lord, and he will bring the king's men to the city of Akkad.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. May Bel and Nabû bless the king, my lord!
I brought out Padî, their king, from the city Jerusalem and placed (him) on the lordly throne over them, and (then) I imposed upon him payment (in recognition) of my overlordship.
Aḫšēri heard about the advance of my expeditionary force and abandoned the city Izirtu, his royal city. He fled to the city Atrāna, a city upon which he relied, and took refuge (there). I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Izirtu, Urmēte, (and) Uzbia, his fortified cities.
The god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises.
... he has returned ...
... Nu...
... you ...
In the course of my campaign, I conquered the city Bīt-Kilamzaḫ, a royal city of the land Elam. I entered that city (and) carried off its booty. (As for) the people living inside it, who had committed crime(s) and misdeeds against the god Aššur, my lord, (and) who had not respected the oath(s sworn) by the great gods, my lords, I slaughtered (them). I killed with the sword (lit. “weapon”) Ḫallušu,
... -ili;
the sons of the elders of the land ...
... tribute of Adâ ...
Witness Nargî.
... not ...
Witness Bahianu.
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, and (then) I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, fortified cities, together with the small(er) settlements in their environs (and) the district of the land Bīt-Barrû in its entirety, and I added (
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "The palace of ... is finished; the work on the ... is finished; the work on the ziggurat is finished; the work on the temple of the Assyrian Ištar is finished" —
— Saturn stands in the halo of the moon.
If a planet rises in the middle of the sky: the people will become rebellious.
If Nergal in his appearance is like a lion, and his horns are very dark: the land will go to ruin; the enemy will plunder in the land; the gods will abandon the land; the cattle of the land will not prosper; the land will not become happy; the land will not see plenty; the land will not become happy; the land will not become happy; the land will not become happy; the land will not become happy.
... red, of the port;
Venus set in the west.
The vertebrae are recessed. First extispicy...
I have written to the king, my lord, about the gods of the house of Anu. Now let the king, my lord, write to his servant what the king, my lord, commands. I shall then write to the king, my lord, whatever the king, my lord, commands.
and the head ...
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
The king, my lord, should send word that they should be shown a house in Nineveh and live there, and that they should bring their wives and children with them.
Witness ... -le'i, ...
The king, my lord, can be glad.
to the rear ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send me the news of the son of Yakin? Did he not come to you?" — I have now written to the king, my lord, the news of the son of Yakin, which I heard from the mouth of the elders of Bit-Yakin: He has come to me. I have sent him to the king, my lord, in the hands of my messenger.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-lešir. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
At that time, I made the enemy people whom I had captured carry baskets (of earth) and they made bricks. I built (and) completed Esagil, the palace of the gods, an image of the apsû, and I filled (it) with splendor.
Aššur-duru-uṣur,
and ...
... what is it that the king, my lord, commands?
To the king, my lord: your servant Balasî. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Witness Nabû-eriba, deputy.
Witness Marduk-šarru-uṣur, servant.
4 oxen, 10 sheep ...
ditto, ditto, the front ditto, 1 1/2 mina;
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Adad-aninu.
On the first day of Shebat (XI), when you perform the sheep offerings before the bed, you say: “She is queen, she is queen!”
Seal of Adad-ahu-iddina, owner of the people being sold.
In the morning, at sunrise, the south wind blew. Now the north wind is blowing.
I have sent ...
saying, "...
A tablet of Iddin-Ea to the palace scribe, his lord. Good health to my lord!
I have heard that ... the son of NN has been killed. I have heard that ... the son of NN has been killed. I have heard that ... the son of NN has been killed.
... Mannu-ki-...
... I brought about their defeat. I blocked up the Ulāya River with their corpses (and) filled the plain of the city Susa with their bodies like baltu-plant(s) and ašāgu-plant(s).
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... the ... of the city of ... and the ... of the city of ... have come to me, saying: '... '" — I have sent them to the king, my lord, in the hands of my messenger.
Tabni-ilu, the chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, has contracted and bought them from these gentlemen for 7 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
The Arabs have entered the city of Zabban from the other side of the river, and are  staying in the city of Zabban. The king, my lord, should know (this).
... of my lord ...
The king, my lord, knows that the city of Dur-Šarruken is a fortress of the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should not abandon it!
I settled ... in the city ... , which is on the shore of the Upper Sea. I settled 1,200 captive highlanders (lit. “Qutû”) of the land Bīt-Sangibūti in the city ... , which is on the shore of the Lower Sea. I considered them as inhabitants of Assyria, and imposed upon them corvée labor like that of the Assyrians.
Isana
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), offspring of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, descendant of Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria —
... the king, my lord
If the Wolf star reaches the sun: the land will become happy; ... will become happy.
If Venus becomes visible in Sivan (III): fall of the enemy.
Total 7, of Adad-...
in all, 6 women.
... the king, my lord, will kill me.
of the king from ...
... I will not go ...
Witness Marduk-... , mayor of the city of Til-Barsip.
to ...
... came ...
Now then I am writing to my lord: let my lord give orders that they should bring the rest of the people of the country who are in my hands and who are with me, and let them go to the Palace. Perhaps my lord will say: "Who are these people?"
I stationed four fierce wild bulls of silver, protectors of my royal path, in the Gate of the Rising Sun and (in) the Gate of Lamma-RA.BI, in gateway(s) of Ezida, which is inside Borsippa.
... this ...
The 'well-being' is destroyed.
NN and his people, Mušallim-Adad and his people,
The palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of Assyria: (brick) belonging to the facing of the temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh.
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial audience gift from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
... jars of ... wine;
The woman Dunnaša-amur, a servant of Aššur-isse'a —
... s of ... of his associates
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let them bring 1,000 (homers of) barley to me, and let them also bring 1,000 (homers of) wheat to me" — I have now brought 1,000 (homers of) barley to the king, my lord, but I have not yet brought the 1,000 (homers of) wheat. The king, my lord, should give the order to the prefects that they should bring the (barley) rations to me, and
... I have written ...
he/they ...
... I brought him (Iaū-biʾdī) to Assyria, together with his wife, his sons, his daughters, his (brothers’) wives, his family, (and) the seed of his father’s house, and I counted (them) as booty. I made the people of the lands plundered by my bow bow down to my yoke. I imposed upon them tribute and impost. I made the people of the lands plundered by my bow bow down to my yoke. I imposed upon them tribute and impost. I made the people
... the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let the king's messenger come and see the face of the king, your lord, and let him give you orders" — I have sent my messenger to the king, my lord, but up to now he has not come back to me. Now, if the king, my lord, commands, I will send my messenger to the king, my lord, and he will bring him back.
If the Scales' position is stable: there will be reconciliation and peace in the land.
of Pašî ...
I conquered the cities of Ḫanūnu, the king of the city Gaza, and I counted (them) as booty. I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire his cities. I turned (them) into mounds of ruins (lit. “mounds and ruins”). I laid waste to his land and I made his entire land smaller.
Witness Sakkannu, cohort commander.
... the army of the Elamite ...
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me, I have now sent the ... s of the palace supervisor ...
10 ditto, hallam;
Witness Šep-Aššur, ...
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord.
Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, who is now ill, and on whom the 'hand' of god ... is being 'placed' in extispicy —
2 scribes, exorcists of the chief eunuch;
... ;
Concerning what the king said to the eunuchs, namely: "The men and horses should come with you" — the men and horses have not yet come.
Witness Šep-ahhe.
... the king of Babylon, who had put his trust in the king of Elam, ... I brought him to Assyria. I defeated the king of Babylon and ... I carried off his booty, possessions, (and) property. I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire the city of Babylon. I turned (it) into a mound of ruins (lit. “a mound and ruins”)... I killed the king of the land Elam with the sword. I captured the king of the land Gambulu, together with the king of the land Bīt
I sent my messenger to Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II) regarding these matters. He detained the eunuch of mine whom I had sent (Marduk-šarru-uṣur) and did not give a reply to my word(s). (iii 10') Ummanigaš heard about the advance of my expeditionary force and fear fell upon him. He brought me as his audience gift twelve large horses from the land Elam.
As to the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "What is the matter with it?" —
... and ...
Witness Ubbuṣu.
(As for) Uppis, chieftain of the city Partakka, Zanasana, chieftain of the city Partukka, (and) Ramateia, chieftain of the city Urakazabarna, Medes whose country is remote (and) who had not crossed the boundary of Assyria nor trodden on its soil in the time of the kings, my ancestors — the awesome fear of the god Aššur, my lord, overwhelmed them and they brought to Nineveh, my capital city, large thoroughbreds (and) blocks of
2 ... -garments, the front red, of the country;
... the Urarṭian(s) ...
After I had finished the work on my palace, I invited inside it the god Aššur, the great lord, (and) the gods and goddesses living in Assyria, and (then) I made splendid offerings and presented my gift(s). I made fine oil from olives and aromatics. At the inauguration of the palace, I had the heads of the subjects of my land drenched (and) I watered their insides with sweet wine.
... the district
God Aššur, great lord, king of all the great gods; god Anu, king of the Igīgū and Anunnakū gods, lord of the lands; god Enlil, exalted one, father of the gods, creator of all; god Ea, king of the apsû, lord of wisdom and understanding; god Sîn, light of heaven and netherworld, lofty luminary; god Šamaš, judge of heaven and netherworld, commander of all; god Adad, the exceptionally strong, lord of abundance; god Marduk
... the king of Elam ...
May Nabû, the august heir, extinguish your life with his merciless sword.
Disregard the (formulation) of the prayer for today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-belu-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! The city of Der and the fort are well.
he ...
total ...
The horses which came ...
... I sent my messenger to Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II) regarding these matters. He detained the eunuch of mine whom I had sent (Marduk-šarru-uṣur) and did not give a reply to my word(s).
... their ...
The king, my lord, should know that the people of the country are not obedient. They do not obey the king's command.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Witness Nabû-abu-uṣur, ...
Witness Silim-Aššur.
Samarra
... the 'station' is present...
NN, servant of the women
... of the fort
... the road ...
... words ...
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), capable shepherd, favorite of the great gods, guardian of truth who loves justice, renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the insubmissive, (and) the one who strikes enemies with lightning:
... I have heard that they are ... ing the ... of the palace.
(As for) Iautaʾ, hardship befell him and he fled alone. I conquered the land of the Nabayateans, the land of the Ubulu, the land of the Damunu, (and) the land of the Gibrê, the lands of the Qumānu, the Ubulu, the Damunu, (and) the Gibrê, the lands of the Tupliaš, the Šurda, the Nabayateans, the Ubulu, the Gibrê, the lands of the Qumānu, the Dam
Ditto by all the gods of Assyria!
When the god Marduk, the great lord, gave me the land and people to rule, he commanded me to plunder the land of my enemy. (vi 1) I plundered the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians, who had not submitted to my yoke, and I brought (them) to Assyria.
If a planet stands in ... : the ruler will die, and his land will diminish.
245 ditto,
20, the 'residences' of the ... s;
... saying: "I will not give them to you; they are my subjects."
Witness ... -bi'a.
1 seah 1 'litre' of regular offering loaves;
And now the king, my lord, has sent a ... , saying: "Let them go and bring the ...
I brought back all together the chariots along with their horses, whose drivers had been killed in the thick of (that) mighty battle and which had themselves been released so that they galloped about on their own. When the second double-hour of the night had passed, I stopped their slaughter.
4 ... ;
... the chief of granaries of ... , the town of the priestesses ...
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the queen mother.
To the king, my lord: your servant Šulmu-šarri. Good health to the king, my lord! The king's land and district are well.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, (or) changed or altered the proceedings...
a ditto of small onions;
... his servants
And as to what you wrote: "The people of my city have been sold for money" —
To the king, my lord: your servant Mardî. Good health to the king, my lord!
On the 29th day the king will perform the ritual of the gods of heaven. Let the king, my lord, write me what the king my lord's orders are.
... cavalry ...
5 — Il-hananu
I, Aššur-etel-ilāni, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Assurbanipal, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Esarhaddon, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of the god A
... I have sent ... to the king, my lord. The ... of the king, my lord, ...
If on the 14th day the moon and sun are seen together: reliable speech; the land will become happy; the gods will remember Akkad favorably.
12,000 sheep, 10,000 ewes, 1,000 (male) goats, 1,000 (female) kids, 1,000 (male) donkeys, 1,000 (female) camels, 1,000 (male) oxen, 1,000 (female) cows, 1,000 (male) donkeys, 1,000 (female) sheep, 1,000
... you
silver, gold, ...
in the presence ...
... the troops ...
Witness Puṭu-ilani. Witness Nabû-šallim.
I have received the ... of the town of ... , and have sent ... to the king, my lord. The horses and the people are in the town of ... , at the disposal of the scribe of the town of ...
The palace of Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I), king of Assyria, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also king of Assyria: (brick) belonging to the courtyard of the temple of the goddess Ištar.
In the future may a later prince, when that temple becomes dilapidated and he restores (it), restore my inscribed name and my monumental inscriptions to their places. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
1 goose, 1 duck, 10 turtledoves.
To the king, my lord: your servant Akkullanu. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
From Nabû-šuma-iškun.
Palace of Sargon (II), king of Assyria.
I have sent my messenger to ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Bīt-Kilamzaḫ, Ḫardišpu, (and) Bīt-Kubatti, their fortified walled cities.
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria; valiant man who acts with the support of Aššur, his lord, and has no rival among the princes of the four quarters, marvelous shepherd,
The chief cupbearer of the god Aššur has come to me, saying: "... the son of Aššur-reṣuwa ... has been sold to the Elamites. Let him come and ... "
Witness Bel-...
I have written to you ...
The king, my lord, should send a bodyguard to them, and they should come and do the work. The king, my lord, should not say: "They are not doing it." They are doing it. The king, my lord, should not say: "They are not doing it in the right way." They are doing it in the right way. The king, my lord, should not say: "They are not doing it in the right place" — they are doing it in the right place. The king, my lord, should not say: "They are not doing it in the right way" —
God Aššur, great lord, king of all the great gods; god Anu, king of the Igīgū and Anunnakū gods, lord of the lands; god Enlil, exalted one, father of the gods, creator of all; god Ea, king of the apsû, lord of wisdom and understanding; god Sîn, king of the lunar disk, lofty luminary; god Šamaš, judge of heaven and underworld, commander of all; god Adad, the exceptionally strong, lord of abundance; god Marduk, sage
I brought out a foundation inscription of the king of the land Elam, son of Imbappi, a king who came before me, and I firmly established (it) in the wall of the city Bīt-Imbî. I inscribed my name on it, made an offering, (and) returned (it) to its place. I made an offering to the goddess Ištar, mistress of the city Bīt-Imbî, the lady of war and battle, and the great lady, my lady. I made an offering to the god Marduk, the great lord
From Nabû'a of Assur.
... Nergal-... , son of Ana-Nabû-taklak
Witness ... -ilu, eunuch.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did you not write me?" I have written to the Palace twice, but have not seen a reply.
Nabû-eriba, ... ; 2 women; in all 3.
Nabû-naṣir, prefect of the Gurraeans;
total, the ...
Concerning the son of Zerî about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me, I have sent him to the king, my lord. He is a competent haruspex, useful to the king, my lord.
There is a hole in the left side of the 'finger' at the side of the middle surface of the 'finger.'
... your ...
Witness Zarutî, physician.
Witness Ahu-illika, chief of trade.
the son of NN ...
The king, my lord, should ask them why they have not given the horses to me.
Dannaya,
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
The king of Babylon, Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), who had fled to (the land) Elam after the king of Assyria had defeated the king of Babylon, heard about the advance of my expeditionary force, then he abandoned the city Bīt-Yakīn, his royal city, and fled to the land Elam. Because of the oath of the great gods which he had transgressed, the gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), and
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), ... , favorite of the great gods, wise prince, circumspect ruler, shepherd of the people, (and) leader of a widespread population, I:
10, Assyrian, among the living.
The king, my lord, can be glad.
Aššur-ereš, Aššur-ahhe-riba, total 2 servants of Aššur-abu-uṣur —
The emissaries of Tabal have come to Nineveh, and I have sent them to the king, my lord. They have brought a letter from the commander-in-chief, saying: "Let them come and enter the king's presence."
... my messenger
As to the news of the Arabs, ... the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Send me a detailed report!"
The king of Assyria, my lord, ... the gods of the lands ...
This from before Aššur.
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, question him.
The gods Aššur, Šamaš, Nabû, and Marduk, the great gods, my lords, decreed a favorable destiny as my lot (and) they granted me a broad mind (and) allowed my mind to learn all of the scribal arts. They glorified the mention of my name (and) made my lordship greater than (those of all other) kings who sit on (royal) daises.
adjoining the house of Issar-šumu-ereš, adjoining the house of Šumma-ilani,
The vertebrae are recessed. There is a 'weapon'-mark in the top of the left surface of the 'finger.'
I have heard that the servants of the king have been exempted, and that the servants of the crown prince have been exempted as well.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "... "
I hitched up 29,800 horses (and equipped) 5,480 chariots for the forces of my land. I divided up the rest of the substantial enemy booty like sheep and goats among my entire camp and my governors, (and) the people of my great cult centers.
10 shoots (of sesame);
The 'finger' is thick. The 'base of the throne' is present. The 'weapon'-mark of the 'increment' rises towards the left. The upper part is elevated. The 'ear' is present. The 'path' on the left of the gall bladder is present...
From Ašaredu.
I have written to the king, my lord, (about) the 1,000 men of the Itu'eans about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me. Now then I am sending them to the king, my lord, in charge of my messenger. The king, my lord, should question them.
... the king of the lands, my lord, sent his messenger to me, saying: "Let the men and horses come and enter the fortresses of the king, my lord!"
14 cavalry mounts, ...
20 cavalrymen of the bodyguard of the crown prince;
I have written to you; do not be negligent about these men.
If he does not pay, the silver shall increase by a fourth.
NN, NN, Ahu-... , ... , Abi-... ,
Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, who is now intent on sending the troops and armed forces which are written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, against the enemy troops which are written in this papyrus, and placed before your great divinity, and (whom) your great divinity knows — should Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, send the troops and armed forces which are written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, against the enemy troops which are written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity,
The village manager of the chief treasurer gives 1 litre of oil and 1 litre of honey.
Witness Nabû-ahhe-iddina, ditto.
The elders of the land of Akkad
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, question him. If he is a traitor, let the king, my lord, ... him; if he is a ... , let the king, my lord, ... him.
Son of Aššur-rēša-iši (I), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, conqueror of the land of the Qutu in their entirety, subduer of the land of the Šubaru in their entirety, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Mutakkil-Nusku (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of the god Aššur; Mutakkil-
the forts ...
... the governor of Arrapha
Witness Didî.
2 jerboas;
The 26th day: at court, favorable.
The king, my lord, should ask the chief tailor: "Who is he?"
... of the son of Yakin
governor of the city of Hatarikka ...
Ikkaru, son of Nabû-kuṣuranni, has contracted and bought it for 30 shekels of silver.
1, NN, scribe of the Aššur temple; 1, Bel-šarru-uṣur, deputy of the ...
Witness Puṭi-šarri.
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), capable shepherd, favorite of the great gods, guardian of truth who loves justice, renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the insubmissive, (and) the one who strikes enemies with lightning:
... in the house of the chief cupbearer.
121 cavalry mounts from the commander-in-chief of the left, of the house of the palace herald, of the chief cupbearer, and of the chief treasurer;
1, Zazaya;
Witness Mušezib-Aššur, ...
... they have brought
... this
Witness Se'-ila'i, ditto.
Palace of Sargon (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, favorite of the great gods.
News of the son of Yakin: he is in Elam.
... I/he ...
The king, my lord, knows that I am a dog who loves his lord. I have been treated like a dog, and I have become a dog. I have no house, no field, no garden, no people, no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no
... Šumma-Aššur, chariot fighter;
At that time, the wall of my city Aššur which previously (other) kings who preceded me had built — that wall had become dilapidated and I completely rebuilt (it) from top to bottom. I deposited my monumental inscription. (vii 10) I anointed with oil the monumental inscriptions of former kings, made sacrifices, (and) returned them to their places. I deposited my monumental inscription. Whoever erases my inscribed name (or) places (it) in the service of a god (or another) person, may
... to the bed chamber
... the commander-in-chief of the palace ...
The king, my lord, gave me 200 oxen, and I have given 100 of them to the king's men. I have given out the rest of the oxen, but the king, my lord, has not given me any more.
... to the Babylonians, who are in Assyria, saying: "The king of Assyria is marching against us. Let us go and ... to the king of Babylon."
... their ...
... their troops
If you should sin against this treaty of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, concerning Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, concerning his brothers, sons by the same mother as Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, concerning the other sons of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, concerning your sons and grandsons, concerning your brothers and your nephews, concerning the men of your country and your district, concerning the men of your palace and your palace women, concerning the servants who serve in your palace, concerning the people of your land
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me:
... Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, who is now intent on sending the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the destination written in this papyrus.
Qurdi-Adad, the goldsmith, and his people; Ahu-ila'i, the ... , and his people;
... to ...
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments...
Witness Abi-yaqar.
1,147 farmers; 1,049 persons; 1,012 ... ; 1,000 (hectares) of arable land; 1,000 (hectares) of land under cultivation therein.
Month of Adar (XII), 12th day.
the son of Yakin ...
... I have given him ...
The woman Gagâ, wife of the merchant —
... I sent my messenger to them, saying: "Let me come and see the face of the king, my lord, and ... Let me come and see the face of the king, my lord, and ... !"
in the city of Arbela ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
To the king, my lord: your servant, the scribe of the house of Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord!
From Nergal-eṭir.
... against the king, my lord
4 ... -garments, felted, the edging red;
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Bel-abu-uṣur, the scribe of the house of the chief treasurer, has written to me:
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether these men or their sons or grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Šumma-ilani, his sons and grandsons,
Month Iyyar (II), 28th day, eponym year of Aššur-naṣir.
3 gowns, the front red, of the country;
Witness Inurtî.
20 turtledoves, served hot;
... the district
They are ... ; they are ... ; they are ... ; they are ... ; they are ... ;
... the Itu'eans
... the xth day;
I have heard that the son of Yakin has come and entered the city of Akkad.
Concerning the people of Mannu-lu-ahu'a about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why have you not sent them to me?" — I have sent 100 men to the king, my lord, but the king, my lord, has not accepted them. I have sent 100 men to the king, my lord, but the king, my lord, has not accepted them.
The king, my lord, should not say: "Why did you not write to me?" I have written to the king, my lord, three or four times.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the ... th day of this month, the month ... of this year,
If the sun rises and goes forward: the days of the ruler will become long; the years of the ruler will be many.
This is its interpretation.
... very
If the moon is seen in the presence of the sun: ... will take place.
garments ...
NN, bodyguard of the crown prince;
... this ...
of ...
The crown prince, my lord, should ... the Itu'eans in the  fortresses.
Witness Nabû-balassu-iqbi, his servant.
The king of Urarṭu has written to the Urarṭian emissary, saying: "The king of Assyria is marching against you; come and do battle with him!"
Witness Dannaya, chariot driver of ...
Total, of Adâ, son of Nabû-balliṭ.
The coils of the colon are 14 in number.
... our ...
... or the ...
I placed Umban-kidinni, his son, on his throne and entrusted him with the people of Akkad. I appointed ... eunuchs of mine as provincial governors over them. I received the payment of the city rulers of the mountain regions, the people of the land Ḫabḫu, the land ...
Month of Shebat (XI), 8th day, eponym year of Bel-Harran-šadû'a (650).
To the king, my lord: your servant PN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur, Bel and Nabû bless the king, my lord.
an estate of ... adjoining the house of Ki-lamši;
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the ... th day of this month, the month ... of this year, to the ... th day of the month ... of this year, for 30 days and nights, the stipulated term —
Assyria is well, the crown prince is well, ...
Ia... , son of the ... , servant of the king, son of Yada'-il, farmer, son of NN, farmer, son of NN, farmer, son of NN, farmer, son of NN, farmer, son of NN, farmer —
NN, farmer, and his people
Marduk-šumu-uṣur, Naṣiru, Tabnî, NN,
Son of Aššur-nādin-aḫḫē, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria:
their king and his magnates ...
Abbaya,
... to the presence
The ... of the temple of Šarrat-nipha, which is inside the city of Harran, which a former king had built —
I am Nabonidus, king of Babylon, the one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of the great gods, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of the great gods, the one who reveres the gods and goddesses, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of the great gods, the one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, the one who reveres the gods and goddesses, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of the great gods, the one who
... Na'id-Marduk, the king of Babylon, who ... the land Elam ...
I shall send ...
Concerning the news of the Mannean, the messenger of the Mannean whom I sent to the king, my lord, has come back and told me: "The Mannean has been defeated on his expedition against the Cimmerians."
Concerning the ritual about which the king, my lord, wrote to me, I have performed it twice, and the king, my lord, has seen it.
If the moon becomes visible in Tebet (X) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour Subartu; a foreigner will rule the Westland.
... with Urad-...
In my thirteenth regnal year, I marched to the land Ḫabḫu. I conquered the city Tīl-Bāri which is on the border of the land Ḫabḫu.
When the land of the Qutu, the land of the Uqumanu, the lands Elḫunia, Šarnida, and Meḫru, the entirety of Mount Kašiiari, the lands Alzu, Amadanu, Niḫanu, Alaia, Tepurzu, Purulumzu, and the entirety of Mount Kašiiari, (all of) the lands Nairi, (and) the entirety of the land of the Lullumu, a large host, formed a confederation with him.
... have not done ...
... ditto, white;
2 talents, audience gift(s);
4 minas of silver, capital, belonging to Šamaš-ila'i, at the disposal of Zabdî, son of Il-dalâ, from the estate of the queen mother.
If a fog rolls in Shebat (XI): eclipse of the Kassites.
Seal of Šamaš-... ,
Concerning the ritual against the earthquake, the day is not propitious. We shall perform it on the 2nd of Tishri (VII).
writing-board ...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Bel-lu-balaṭ or his son or his grandsons or his brothers,
Marduk-...
Witness Tabal.
Concerning the substitute king about whom the king wrote to me: "He should sit for 100 days" — I have written to the Palace about this matter, but I have not heard an answer. Now, if it is acceptable to the king, my lord, let them perform the ritual of the substitute king for 100 days.
The chief of granaries has written to me: "The ... s of the king have been delayed; the ... s of the king have been delayed; the ... s of the king have been delayed; the ... s of the king have been delayed."
I have sent my army to you; come and
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
On my second campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me and I marched to the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians, who since time immemorial had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors. In the high mountains, difficult terrain, I rode on horseback and had my personal chariot carried on (men’s) necks. (iv 10) In very rugged terrain I roamed about on foot like a wild bull.
The king should question him ...
I put to the sword the population of the city Ḫirimmu, a dangerous enemy, and I did not spare a single one. I hung their corpses on poles and placed (them) around the city. I reorganized that district (and) imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the gods of Assyria, my lords.
which in my presence ...
(As to) the news of the son of Yakin: he is in Babylon. The king, my lord, should know (this).
Witness Barruqu, ditto.
and ...
... he
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
... they are transporting
... the deputy of the palace herald
An estate of 40 hectares of sown land;
The 17th day: at court, favorable.
8 female Corybantes;
... the Itu'eans
... of the king to the son of Zababa-iddina
1 ox, 100 sheep, ...
8 (cuts of) meat ... ;
Witness Sukkaya.
... the king, my lord, ...
Witness Aššur-šumu-uṣur.
... the land of the Qutu, the land of the Uqumanu, the lands Elḫunia, Šarnida, and Meḫru, the lands ... , Ḫilmu, Pillatu, and Ḫupapanu, the lands Bīt-Agūsi, Bīt-Imbî, Bīt-Kapsi, Bīt-Sangi, Bīt-Urzakki, Bīt-Zualzaš, (and) Bīt-Matti, the lands Bīt-Zual
to ...
If the moon at its appearance wears a crown: the harvest of the land will prosper; the king will reach the highest rank; his land will dwell as if in pastures near the city; the king will reach the highest rank.
... of the house of NN
Pipiya, son of the scribe of ...
the town of Udia, which is in ...
... all ...
An estate of 1 hectare 5 decares of land in cultivation, adjoining the road that leads to the village of the palace herald, adjoining the field of Aplaya, adjoining the field of Kakkullanu,
Now then I am sending him to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, question him ...
Moreover, (as for) the cities Gaza, Joppa, (and) Azuru, which had not submitted to my yoke, I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered them. I brought out of them 200,150 people, together with their possessions, their goods, their property, (and) their gods, and I counted (them) as booty. Moreover, I destroyed, devastated, (and) turned into ruins their small(er) settlements, which were without number. I burned with fire pavilion(s) (
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "...
From Balasî.
I decorated them with silver (and) copper knobbed nails. I adorned the arches, friezes, and all of their copings with baked bricks (glazed in the color of) obsidian (and) lapis lazuli.
The palace of Amēl-Marduk, king of Babylon, son of Nebuchadnezzar (II), king of Babylon, son of Nabû-balāssu-iqbi (II), (who was) also king of Babylon.
... a bowl of wine
... I sent ... to the king, my lord, saying: "... ; the king, my lord, should send ... to the magnates, and they should go and bring the ... s to me. I will then send the ... s to the king, my lord." Now then I have written to the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, send ... to the magnates, and may they bring the ... s to me.
... the gods of Assyria, who dwell in the city of Calah, about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me:
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, wise prince, circumspect ruler, shepherd of the people, (and) leader of a widespread population, I:
the woman Bazitu ...
The king should send word that they should be shown a house in Nineveh, and they should go and live there. They should not go to Dur-Šarruken, because of the enemy.
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhe.
... the son of the king ...
Adad-nerari (III), overseer, son of Šamši-Adad (V), overseer, son of Shalmaneser (III), likewise overseer.
I took away the land Bīt-Agusi (Arpad) and the land Bīt-Ammon (Ammon) in their entirety (and) I annexed (them) to Assyria. I placed a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over them. I received the payment of the city rulers of the cities Tyre (and) Sidon. I received the payment of the kings of the cities Arwad, Byblos, (and) Samsimurruna. I brought back to Assyria (their) horses, their equipment, (and
... Witness Qi...
Witness Šumma-Ya'u, priest of Ninurta.
The palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of Assyria: (brick) belonging to the facing of the temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh.
... and if ...
... the royal road which the king, our lord, took ...
... your ...
to my father, one ...
I have appointed a scribe of mine, Aššur-šarru-uṣur, to the service of the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, send him to the presence of the king, my lord, and let the king, my lord, ask him what the king, my lord, sent him.
Nergal-uballiṭ ... , son of Daltâ, from Šazabin;
I put to the sword the population of the city Ḫirimmu, a dangerous enemy, and I did not spare a single one. I hung their corpses on poles and placed (them) around the city. I reorganized that district (and) imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the gods of Assyria, my lords.
An estate of x hectares of land, 2 vineyards,
in the presence of Aššur-aplu-...
If the moon at its appearance ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... your ...
Witness Zar-Issar.
in accordance with the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord, and your favorable decisions, should the subject of this query, Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, strive and plan?
To the king, my lord: your servant Inurta-belu-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord!
... , son of Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, ...
Witness Silim-Aššur, grand vizier.
to the sheikh ...
... the palace of the queen ...
Month Iyyar (II), 6th day, eponym year of NN.
... Bit-Hamban
Witness Nabû-eṭir, chief tailor.
1, Abdi-Dadi, the prefect of the city of Hindanu;
12, in all 20, ...
Witness Inurta-šumu-uṣur, scribe.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nadin-šumi. Good health  to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk greatly bless the king, my lord!
The palace of Adad-nārārī, king of the universe, son of Arik-dīn-ili, king of Assyria: (brick) belonging to the courtyard of the temple of the goddess Ištar.
2 black horses,
The property of the temple of the goddess Ištar, mistress of the city Arbela, which Sennacherib, king of Assyria, ...
The money is paid completely. That field is purchased and acquired.
... their ... and their ...
Seal of Se'-eriba, owner of the woman being sold.
The palace of Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria.
I have heard that they have been incited to rebellion by the chief eunuch and the chief cupbearer, and that they are plotting to kill me. I am now writing to the king, my lord, that the king, my lord, may know (this).
Month Iyyar (II), 20th day, eponym year of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, governor of Samaria.
... Ariye ...
... to the city ... in the district of the city Ḫarḫar ...
6 minas, NN, son of NN, for the ... of the bed ... ;
From Adad-šumu-uṣur.
... the governors ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ra'im-nišešu. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
In the city of Assur, at the command of the great lord, Marduk, I built a palace for my royal residence.
... I have heard that you are in ...
Bel-... , 1 person; Nabû-šar-ahhešu, 2 persons; Nabû-šumu-iddina, 2 persons;
2 ... ;
As to what my lord wrote to me: "The day you see this letter of mine, go to the Palace and speak with the magnates about the ... of Aššur-belu-taqqin. They should give you the ... of Aššur-belu-taqqin, and you should go and bring him to me. I shall speak with him, and if he is to die, I shall bury him where he dictates, and if he is to live, I shall bring him out and speak with him."
... of his servant
4 seahs of barley for his fingernail.
... , the palace of the queen.
On the 22nd day of the month of Iyyar (II), at the turn of the day,
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
600, 700, the town of Sapirrutu;
71 72 73 74 — ... -Issar, the scribe.
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
... s of the fort
130 hectares of arable land in the town of Huzirina; 10 hectares under cultivation therein; 1 ox, 1 threshing-floor, 1 cistern for water; 1 house; 1 vegetable garden; 1 runaway shepherd:
The ... who came, saying: "The men of the Palace Herald have gone to Bit-Amukani ...
Month Ab (V), 25th day, eponym year of Mannu-ki-Adad.
Perhaps my lord will say:
... -uṣur, son of Aqaraya, the scribe of ...
... the land of the Qutu, the land of the Uqumanu, the land of the Papḫu, the land of the Šubaru, the land of the Luḫu, the land of the Ḫašmar, the land of the Ša-pī-Bēl, the land of the Nairi, the land of the Šubrû, the land of the Marusu, the land of the Bīt-Adini, the land of the Bīt-Amukāni, the land of the Bīt-Šil
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
I had foundation inscriptions made of silver, gold, bronze, lapis lazuli, alabaster, basalt, pendû-stone, elallu-stone, (and) white limestone, (as well as) inscribed objects of baked clay, and (then) I depicted on them hieroglyphs representing the writing of my name. I wrote on them the might of the great hero, the god Marduk, (and) the deeds that I had done, my pious work, (and) I placed (these inscriptions) in the foundations (and)
The town of Dahasa,
(As for) Bēl-iqīša, son of Bunnannū, a Gambulian whose residence is located twelve leagues distance in swamps (and) canebrakes, by the command of the god Aššur, my lord, fear of the brilliance of the god Aššur, my lord, overwhelmed him and he came to Nineveh, my capital city, before me, and kissed my feet. I made him swear an oath by the great gods and (then) I gave him a royal daughter in marriage. (As for) his brothers, his
Ashur-bunaya-usur,
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Eltekeh (and) Tamnâ. I approached the city Ekron and I killed the governors (and) nobles who had committed crime(s) and hung their corpses on towers around the city; I counted the citizens who had committed the criminal acts as booty; (and) I commanded that the rest of them, (those) who were not guilty of crimes or wrongdoing, (to) whom no penalty was due, be allowed to go free.
Nabû-... , witness Marduk-... , ...
Witness Šulmu-ahhe, royal bodyguard.
3 shekels of silver belonging to Bahianu, at the disposal of Abi-ṭab.
Total 11 ...
Witness Nanî.
I have appointed my chariot-horse trainer as the prefect of the Arabs.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ululayu. The best of health to the king, my lord! Assyria is well, the temples are well, all the king's forts are well. The king, my lord, can be glad indeed.
... the land of ...
... of Kush
I shall send ...
saying, "...
... to the land of Hau ... to Assyria ... I brought ... I settled them in ... I imposed upon them ... I imposed upon them ... I imposed upon them ... I imposed upon them ...
5 mares:
The ... of the ... s of the city of ... have been sold for ... Shekels of silver have been given to the ... of the city of ... , and the ... of the city of ... have been sold for ... Shekels of silver.
... the god Nabû
The daytime of the 19th was cloudy, the setting of the moon was not visible.
The king, my lord, knows that my brother is dying. Let the king, my lord, come and see him.
Witness ... -ahhe.
The city of Der, which is in ...
You make a flour/incense-offering before Sîn, perform a sheep offering, pour oil, honey, beer and wine, and sing: “O Lord and King, luminary of the pure heavens.” You ... before the Anunnaki gods, make a flour/incense-offering, pour oil, honey, beer and wine, and sing: “... ”
Witness Nabû-šumu-... , scribe, keeper of the contract.
... I will do
(... ) of ...
... Pašeru and NN
... from the beginning of my reign ...
... Aššur-uballiṭ
Moreover, (as for) the cities Gumusanu, Sibur, Lusia, Uzia, Bubilu, Dunnu, (and) Uppumu, which are on the border of the land Elam, I conquered those cities. I tore the land Elam apart from within. I carried off to Assyria (their) horses, (their) equipment, (and) their implements of war. I laid waste to the land Elam (and) made its people bow down to my yoke.
the gods ...
Total 15 houses, 1 threshing floor,
If the moon is surrounded by a halo, and Regulus stands in it: in that year women will give birth to male children.
The city of Tilmun.
Seal of Sasî, owner of the man being sold.
As to the news of the Arabs ...
... I brought them to my city Aššur. I settled them in a pleasant abode inside my city Aššur. I ... them with ... , bread, wine, oil, honey, ... , and ...
the Mušku ...
From Munnabitu.
Duʾūzu (IV), the twenty-fourth day, eponymy of Bēlšunu, governor of the city Ḫindāru (648).
all ...
in the district of the king ...
Witness Ubru-Nabû, keeper of the tablet.
I have now written to the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, do as he deems best. I am a poor man; I have no horse, no mule, no donkey, no camel, no ox, no sheep, no goats, no ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû'a. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
As for me, Sennacherib, king of Assyria, the performing of this work came to my attention by the will of the gods and I put my mind to it. I forcibly removed the people of Chaldea, Aramean (tribes), the land of the Manneans, the lands Que and Ḫilakku, (and) Philistia, and the land (of the city) Tyre, who had not submitted to my yoke, then I made them carry baskets (of earth) and they made bricks.
Witness Hiriṣayu.
The king's word to the ... s of Nineveh: I am well; you can be glad.
... Esaggil and Babylon ...
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Zazaya.
Witness NN, servant of his.
Now ...
If the moon at its appearance wears a crown: constantly the harvest of the land will prosper; the land will dwell as if in pastures near the city; the king will reach the highest rank.
55 sheep, 55 (cuts of) meat, 2 homers of wine — of the chief treasurer.
(Property) of Šamaš-rēša-uṣur, the field marshal of the king.
Palace of Sennacherib, king of Assyria: (This is) the audience gift that Karib-il, king of the land Saba, presented to me. Whoever places (it) in the service of a god (or another) person (or) erases my inscribed name, may the deities ... , ... , (and) ... make his name (and) his seed disappear.
... in Der
When I was coming to Nabû-ahhe-eriba, I met ... s who had been sold for money. I asked them where they came from, and they said: "We are merchants."
an estate of 1 hectare 5 decares adjoining Ilu-ereš and Šamaš-ereš;
We kept watch on the 29th day; we saw the moon. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king my lord!
in all, 6: the 'residences' of ...
... of the town of Hatarakka
At the beginning of my kingship, in my first year, when I sat in greatness on (my) royal throne, good signs were established for me; in heaven and on earth, he (the god Marduk) constantly sent me his omen(s). The angry gods were reconciled (and) they repeatedly disclosed favorable signs concerning the (re)entering of Esagil and Ezida, the renovation of the gods, the completion of the cult centers, (and) the securing of the foundation(s) of the throne of my priestly office.
to Ilu-ereš ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-balassu-iqbi. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
... there is a hole. The 'cap' rides upon the 'outside.'
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-belu-taqqin. Good health to the king, my lord!
4 minas of silver, 2 togas, 2 tunics: the Palace Superintendent;
saying, "...
... here ...
10 ... of ... they have placed ...
... of the palace
Month Elul (VI), 20th day, eponym year of Mannu-ki-Adad.
my lord, my lord ...
... I sent ... to them, saying: "... you ... and ... the fort ... of the land of Akkad ... you will not ... the land of Akkad ... you will not ... the land of Akkad ... you will not ... the land of Akkad ... you will not ... the land of Akkad ... you will not ... the land of Akkad ... you will not ... the land of Akkad ... you will not ... the land of Akkad ... you will not ... the land of Akkad ... you will not ... the land of Akkad ... you will not
... the town of Šamaš-ila'i
these ...
When they were taken away, the men ...
Concerning the news of the king, my lord, I have heard that he is in the presence of Bel-iqiša. Now, if it is acceptable to the king, my lord, let the king, my lord, send a messenger to come and have a look at the fortress.
... we have written
... 20 hectares ...
... Assyria
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
On my second campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me and I marched to the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians, who since time immemorial had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors. In the high mountains, difficult terrain, I rode on horseback and had my personal chariot carried on (men’s) necks. In very rugged terrain I roamed about on foot like a wild bull.
Witness Šamaš-šallim, ditto.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
... concerning ... the ...
Witness Aššur-...
I made the palace beautiful. To be an object of wonder for all of the people, I raised the superstructure of the entire palace.
I am herewith sending them to the king, my lord. What are the king my lord's orders?
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial audience gift from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
... the rear part ...
... I gave to them. Now, if they want to sell their fields and houses, they may sell them. Whoever buys a field or a house from these men, my servants, shall give x minas of silver to the governor of his city.
The king, my lord, should send word that they should be shown a house in Nineveh and live there, until the king, my lord, sends me the ... s of the country, and I can give them to the king, my lord.
4 litres of honey ...
Witness Se'-Aššur, horse trainer.
... is present.
The emissaries of the Mannean king have come to me, bringing horses, mules, and equipment. I have reviewed them, and they are in good condition.
From Rašil the older, servant of the king.
Total, the central stables.
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... to the god Šamaš ...
130 ...
“The One Who Convulses the Regions”: (this is) the Ḫandūru Gate. “The One Who Flattens All Enemies”: (this is) the Aššur Gate. “The Bearer of the Produce of the Mountains”: (this is) the Sennacherib Gate. “The One Who Exorcises the ‘Flesh’ of the Asakku-demon”: (this is) the Step Gate. “The One Who Brings in Income from the Settlements”: (this is) the
When the king, my lord, sent me to the land of Laqû, I marched as far as the city of Bīt-Ḫumria (Israel). I received tribute from the city rulers of the land of Laqû.
Month Adar (XII), 7th day, eponym year of Abi-ram, grand vizier.
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur.
When I heard ...
A tablet of Bel-le'i, the prefect of the New Palace to NN.
He shall return the money tenfold to its owners.
The king, my lord, should know that the work is hard for us.
Concerning the news of the king, my lord, which the magnates told me, I have written to the king, my lord, everything that they said. The king, my lord, may do as he deems best.
... of my house
Tribute from the land of the people of Ḫamat.
you did not send ...
Shalmaneser, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (I), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of Aššur:
To the king, my lord: your servant, the chief singer of NN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord. May the great gods bestow long days, well-being and joy upon the king, my lord.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, have changed or altered the proceedings, or jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
the woman ... -iqbi, his daughter, ... ;
... I settled ... people of the land Bīt-Yakīn ... I set a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over them. I annexed the land Bīt-Yakīn to Assyria (and) placed ... under the authority of a eunuch of mine.
Seal of Zabinu, chief of granaries of the city of Til-Barsip, owner of the vineyard being sold.
The work of the king, my lord, is ...
... their ... s
... the king ...
The messengers of the king of Elam have come to me, saying: "The king of Elam has sent us to Nippur. We are going to bring the horses of the king of Elam."
... he has seized ...
Disregard that ... the Itu'eans ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send an answer to my letter?" —
Your servant Nabû-bel-šumati: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: I have sent my messenger to greet the king, the horses and the soldiers.
I have sent my messenger to the king, my lord, but have not heard an answer to my letter.
... let them give
A tablet of Assurbanipal to his brother, Aššur-etel-ilani. Good health to my brother!
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord!
x hectares of field in the town of Hanê, adjoining the road that leads to the Inner City, adjoining the field of Zabinu, adjoining the field of Aššur-belu-taqqin,
Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it? Does your great divinity know it? Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord?
... the king, our lord
Witness Basasu, scribe.
... the land of Sumer and Akkad
of ...
... I have heard that Bel-...
scribe of the grand vizier, your lord.
Month ... , 1st day, eponym year of Sagab (651).
(As for) Uaiteʾ (Iautaʾ), hardship befell him and he fled alone. I defeated the troops of the land of the Arabs, his allies, together with the troops of the land of the Edomites, his allies, in a pitched battle. (vii 10) I captured alive Uaiteʾ, together with the corpses of his warriors. I placed (his) hands and feet in iron fetters and brought him to Assyria, before me. I defeated the troops of the land of the Qedar, together with the troops of Egypt and
I have heard that the king of Elam has sent a letter to the son of Yakin, saying: "Let your father's house come to my presence, and let me send you a message. I am going to send you a messenger to the son of Yakin; speak kindly with him, and let him come to my presence."
in the temple of DN ...
... this ...
they say
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
O god Marduk, great lord, when you look upon this table with pleasure, (and) when (this) table is set (and) regular, ceaseless offerings are presented, may the god Šulpae, the lord of the table, speak well of Aššur-etel-ilāni, king of Assyria, your favorite ruler, before you!
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether these men or their sons or their grandsons or their brothers or their nephews or their prefect or their cohort commander or their neighbour or their relative or their friend or their neighbour or their prefect or their mayor or their city overseer or their relative or their neighbour or their prefect or their mayor or their neighbour or their prefect or their mayor or their relative or their neighbour or their prefect or their mayor or their relative or their neighbour or their prefect or their mayor or their relative or their neighbour or their prefect or their mayor or their relative
Your servant NN: I would gladly die for the king of the lands, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king of the lands, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
Concerning the ...
... they are eating ...
The king, my lord, should not be afraid of this eclipse.
At that time, the temple of the goddess Ištar, mistress of the city Arbela, my mistress, which kings who preceded me had previously built — that temple had become dilapidated and I completely rebuilt it from top to bottom. I deposited my monumental inscription.
Duʾūzu (IV), the ... day, eponymy of ... , governor of ... (699).
... to ...
to ...
10 wooden ... s;
... the day when Nabû-šimanni
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether these men or their sons or grandsons, seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Bel-šarru-uṣur and his sons,
Witness Nabû-sakip, ...
Now Aššur-ahu-iddina has gone to the Palace. May the king, my lord, send word that he should be arrested and brought to me, so I can question him.
... I will give
Witness NN, scribe.
As to Aššur-šallim about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
To the king, my lord: your servant, the chief of trade. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord.
I am your god, I am your lord.
Total, 41 — (governor of) Samaria.
... s, 2 ... s, 3 ... s
I shall send ...
To the governor, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. Good health to my lord!
... I have ...
... Now, if it is agreeable to the king, my lord, ...
Witness NN, scribe.
I entered the pass of Mount Habruru (and) marched to the land Gilzānu. I conquered the city Bīt-Kilamzaḫ, their fortified city, whose location is situated between rivers. I brought out from it people, horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty.
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, pious prince who reveres the gods Nabû and Marduk —
(As for) Aplāya, son of Nabû-salim, ... , who had cast off the yoke of the god Aššur, my lord, and had sided with my enemy, the troops of the god Aššur, my lord, overwhelmed him like a flood.
... to the city ...
In the future, may one of the kings, my descendants, whom the god Aššur names for shepherding the land and people, renovate its dilapidated section(s) when that palace becomes old and dilapidated. May he find an inscribed object bearing my name, anoint (it) with oil, make an offering, (and) return (it) to its place. The god Aššur will (then) hear his prayers.
I took the city Elenzaš as a royal city and a fortress for that district, then I changed its former name and called it Kār-Sennacherib. I settled therein the people of the lands that I had conquered. I placed (it) under the authority of a eunuch of mine, the governor of the city Ḫarḫar, and (thus) enlarged my land.
... s in the house ...
... the king, my lord
... I will do
If a snake keeps scaring (people) in a temple: anger of the god.
... the king, my lord ...
for one ...
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Westlander will defeat Subartu in battle.
Witness ... -eriba, son of Habil-ken.
... the land of the Arameans ... I settled them in ... I imposed upon them tax, tribute, (and) corvée. I ... the land of the Arameans ...
1, the commander-in-chief of ... ;
... is your divinity, Aššur, lord of the gods!
Witness Abi-ul-idi, ditto.
I took the city Elenzaš as a royal city and a fortress for that district, and (then) I changed its former name and
Ashur-ilaya,
cure of ...
1, (ditto) from Hatti;
... in the city of Qirbit ...
It shall increase by a fourth.
Witness Aššur-le'i, ...
Nabû-ila'i, ... of the palace herald ...
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, wise prince, circumspect ruler, shepherd of the people, (and) leader of a widespread population, I:
... I shall go and speak with them. The chief of the shepherds
Why ... ? I am a servant of the king, my lord.
If there is an eclipse in the morning watch in Sivan (III) from the 1st to the 30th day: the king of Akkad will die, and his son will seize the throne; the king of Elam will die, and his son will seize the throne; the king of the Westland will die, and his son will seize the throne; the king of the Guti will die, and his son will seize the throne.
Your servant Nergal-eṭir: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
Month Kislev (IX), 3rd day, eponym year of Sin-ahhe-riba.
Witness ... zeru. Witness NN, palace manager.
5 ... of ivory;
The gods of heaven and earth have made peace with Assurbanipal, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters, true shepherd, who does good, king of justice, lover of truth, who makes his people content, who always behaves kindly towards the officials who serve him and rewards the reverent who obey his royal command —
I have heard that ... is in the presence of the chief cupbearer; he is on his way to my lord.
At that time, the temple of the goddess Ištar, mistress of the city Arbela, my mistress, which Ilu-šumma, my forefather, a king who preceded me, had previously built — that temple had become dilapidated and I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I completely rebuilt that temple from top to bottom. I made it larger than before, raised its superstructure, and deposited my monumental inscription.
... the cities of the land of Bit-Yakin, which are on the other side of the Bitter Sea,
... mina(s)
... 28 horses, the cohort commander of the royal bodyguard;
Witness Remanni-Adad, baker.
from Dur-Šarruken ...
3 ditto of the 'yoke' of copper;
Concerning Aššur-bani-...
Witness Inurta-šarru-uṣur, 'third man.'
... at the disposal of Ašipâ
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), (and) favorite of the great gods:
2 horses, 2 mules, belonging to Aššur-da''inanni,
In the city of Kar-Nergal, which is on the bank of the Tigris, ...
I have written to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should send a bodyguard to the town of the scribe of the palace, and let them bring the people there. The king, my lord, should not say: "Why did you not write to me?" I have written to the king, my lord, three or four times, but I have not heard an answer from the king, my lord.
... they are bringing to me. The king, my lord, should know (this).
before the gods ...
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, question him.
3 ... ;
In the east, the sun rises ...
1, prefect of the cavalry;
May they make the heart of the great lord, the god Marduk, happy!
The king, my lord, should ask the messenger of the ...
The king, my lord, should send word that they should be shown a house in Nineveh and live there, until I have built a house for them.
Witness Pan-Issar-lamur.
... the commander-in-chief ...
The temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, my mistress, which Adad-nārārī (I), my forefather, a king who preceded me, had previously built — that temple had become dilapidated and I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I completely rebuilt that temple from top to bottom. I made it larger than before, raised its superstructure, and deposited my monumental inscription.
Witness Nabû-eriba, deputy of the team-commander.
If you should sin against this treaty of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, concerning Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, concerning his brothers, sons by the same mother as Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, concerning the other sons of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, concerning your sons and grandsons, concerning your wives and your daughters, concerning your brothers and your nephews, concerning your family and your seed, concerning Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, concerning Esarhaddon, king
The Lady of Akkad, the Lady of the House of Aššur, the Lady of the House of Mullissu, the Lady of the House of Mašmaš, the Lady of the House of Šarrat-nipha, the Lady of the House of Ištar of Nineveh, the Lady of the House of Ištar of Arbela, the Lady of the House of Zarpanitu, the Lady of the House of Nergal, the Lady of the House of Laṣ, the Lady of the House of Gula, the Lady of the House of Mar-
The king, my lord, knows that the towns and the people of the province of Calah are very much at the king's disposal.
From this day, the 10th day of this month, the month ... of this year, to the ... th day of the month ... of this year, 30 days and nights, my stipulated term —
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, have jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
Witness Basnî, servant of ...
which he/they ...
I do not know whether it is true or not.
... of the sheep offerings of the whole year.
... gold ...
An estate of 40 hectares of land in the town of ...
I have written to the Palace about the ... of the governor of ... and about the governor of Arrapha.
... I built (and) completed (it) from its foundations to its crenellations. I made (it) greater than before, raised (its) superstructure, (and) glorified (it). I named it Ešgalšiddudua, ‘The palace that administers everything.’
The 10th day: at court, favourable.
1, the woman Gadâ;
If he does not pay, it shall increase by 5 seahs per homer.
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Mannu-ki-... , ...
If the sun rises in the middle of the moon: there will be 3 years of famine, variant: three years of famine and three years of plague.
3 2-seah jars of hinhinu-seeds;
his sons ...
... If the king says, "...
Month Shebat (XI), 1st day, eponym year of Zazaya.
2 (tablets of) Enuma Anu Enlil,
... what you did not ...
... the city of Dur-Šarruken ...
Should Assurbanipal, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, send Ša-Nabû-šû, chief eunuch, to the district of Gambulu, and should he go?
Witness Nanû.
I put to the sword the population of the city Ḫirimmu, a dangerous enemy, and I did not spare a single one. I hung their corpses on poles and placed (them) around the city. I reorganized that district (and) imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the gods of Assyria, my lords.
I am herewith sending him to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, question him.
... to ...
Month of Nisan (I), 18th day.
The barley has been piled up, (but) the king, my lord, has not yet written to me.
... to the king, my lord, ... I am a servant of the king, my lord. I have sent my messenger to greet the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should send a messenger to come and see how I am doing. I am a servant of the king, my lord. I am one who fears the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, send a messenger to come and see how I am doing.
Ahabî,
... ;
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
... adjoining the road that leads to the village of ...
... my ...
Now then ...
... is the ... of his ...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether Assurbanipal, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, should send Ša-Nabû-šû, chief eunuch, to the district of Gambulu,
May Nabû, ... , and Marduk bless the king, my lord.
May Palil, the foremost lord, extinguish your life with his merciless sword.
total, 4 ...
... in my presence ...
adjoining the field of the Assyrian(s),
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. The best of health to the king, my lord!
The one who (re)constructed the temple of the god Aššur, (re)built Esagil and Babylon, (and) renewed the statues of the great gods;
... the land of the Qutu, the land of the Uqumanu, the land of the Šubaru, the land of the Lullumu, the land of the ... , the land of the Šubrû, the land of the Marusu, the land of the ... , the land of the Zikirtaeans, the land of the ... , the land of the Ubulu, the land of the Damunu, the land of the Gambulu, the land of the Ḫindaru, the land of the Ruʾuʾa, the land
Now ...
9 ditto of sesame;
As to the governors, my lords, who are going to the country of the Manneans, the king, my lord, should give them orders as follows:
1, the grand vizier;
... will say ...
2 homers of barley — Sin-ašared;
To the governor, my lord: your servant Nabû-zeru-lešir. Good health to my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless my lord! May they give you the best of health and ...
... I received gold (and) shining silver sling straps as their wrist-trappings (and) slashed off their belts with sharp swords. I took away gold (and) silver (decorated) belt-daggers as their waist-trappings.
35 homers of wine, the chief victualler;
of 1,230 ...
1 mina, Nabû-... ;
40, the exorcists' lore,
The men of the chief cupbearer and the chief eunuch have come and said: "The king has given us the land of the Itu'eans. We are going to settle them there." They are going to settle them in the land of the Itu'eans.
To the treasurer, my lord: your servant Nabû-zeru-lešir. Good health to my lord!
Witness Ilu-le'i.
5,000 stalks of vine, a house, a threshing floor, and a garden in the town of Til-rahî —
... the king
... the 'weapon'-mark of the 'strength' is present...
The land of the king is well; the forts of the king are well. The king, my lord, can be glad indeed. The king, my lord, can be happy indeed.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-belu-ka''in. Good health to the king, my lord!
Arba'ilayu,
or in ...
Witness Zababa-eriba, 'third man.'
in ...
... I have sent ... to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, ...
Aššur, great lord, ...
... Witness ...
... the farmer ...
... in the charge of Riša-Dadi
... the 10th day ...
... before them
... the governor
... their ... s
The queen supplies the food for the wedding night of Mullissu.
... the goddess Bēlat-parṣī
... the land of Sūḫu
... of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the ...
... the son of Nabû-bel-šumati ... to the son of Daltâ ... the servants of the king ...
When the king, my lord, was in ... , the king's men seized the men of the city.
... this ...
... to his sons
1 breast,
I have sent my messenger to the king, my lord.
As for him, Hezekiah, fear of my lordly brilliance overwhelmed him and, after my (departure), he had the auxiliary forces and his elite troops whom he had brought inside the city Jerusalem, his royal city, along with 30 talents of gold, 800 talents of silver, choice antimony, large blocks of ... , ivory beds, armchairs of ivory, elephant hide(s), elephant ivory, ebony, boxwood, every kind of valuable treasure, as well as his daughters, his palace women, male singers, (and) female
Guzana
If a planet stands at the left horn of the moon: the king of the Westland will exercise world rule.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
... the governors
... ,
... Arbela
... of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari
a cup of ... ;
... to the king, my lord, ...
... Iddin-ahi
10 shekels of silver belonging to Ahu-iddina, at the disposal of Nadinu.
... ayu, the governor
Month of Marchesvan (VIII), eponymy of Atar-ili, governor of Laḫīru.
shall give 10 minas of silver ...
... I have sent ... to ... ; if he comes, I shall send him to the king, my lord.
... the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city
... the king, my lord, ...
Witness Haldi-naṣir, horse trainer of the royal bodyguard.
I conquered the land Bīt-Ḫumria (Israel) in its entirety (and) I brought to Assyria twenty talents of gold, one thousand choice stones, ... , (and) property.
I wrote to you: "Why did you not send me the news of the Urarṭian? Now, send me the news of the Urarṭian!" You wrote back: "I have sent the news of the Urarṭian to the king, my lord."
... I, Nabû-šumu-uṣur ...
of the whole mountain ...
... in the middle of the city, in the courtyard of the temple of the goddess Ištar, in the city of Nineveh, in the middle of the city, in the courtyard of the temple of the goddess Ištar, in the city of Nineveh, in the middle of the city, in the courtyard of the temple of the goddess Ištar, in the city of Nineveh, in the middle of the city, in the courtyard of the temple of the goddess Ištar, in the city of Nineveh, in the middle of the city,
in the days of ...
... he will not be able to do battle.
I had a stele made, had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, written on it, and I erected (it) in (that) city.
the watch of his father ...
From Nabû-iqbi.
... , 1 female donkey, 1 male donkey, 10 cows,
... the head of Scorpius ...
NN, his wife, his son, his daughter,
Witness Aššur-le'i, 'third man.'
Issar-šarru-...
Total, 10 talents of the heavy sort, 12 minas of red wool, 10 minas of black wool, 10 minas of blue wool, 10 minas of red-purple wool, 10 minas of indigo wool, all (assigned) to Aššur.
Ilu-eriba,
... Se'-abu-...
The woman Sagibî, wife of Nabû-zeru-lešir, gardener, 1 son, 1 woman, 1 daughter, total 5.
Of 20 oxen: the stomachs, livers, kidneys, hearts.
a chariot ...
... you will place
... the king, my lord
... Now then
... of the king ... of the land ...
1 cloak, care of the ... ;
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
The king should not listen to the words of the prelate!
Sagibi, ... ;
Kaštaritu, city lord of Karkaššî, who has sent his messenger to NN saying: "Let us stand together, mobilize an army, and go to wage war against the army of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria" —
... house ...
At that time, the king of Assyria, my lord, sent me to the house of the gods of the king of the lands, and I prayed to the gods of the king, my lord, before the gods of heaven and earth. I prayed to the gods of the king, my lord, for the life of the king, my lord, and for the life of the crown prince, the successor of the king, my lord.
I have sent ... to the king, my lord, ... Now then I am sending to the king, my lord, the messenger of mine who went to the Arabs.
... seah of 8 'litres'
At that time, the people of the city Tumurrum, whose dwellings are situated like the nests of eagles, the foremost of birds, on the peak of Mount Nipur, a rugged mountain, and who had not bowed down to the yoke — I had my camp pitched at the foot of Mount Nipur. I conquered that city (Tumurrum) in its entirety. I carried off as booty 30 talents of gold, 2,000 talents of silver, ... , property, (and) possessions.
Disregard that ...
(As for) the one who alters my inscribed object (and) disrespects my words, may the god Aššur, my lord, overthrow his sovereignty (and) destroy his name (and) his seed from the land.
I ...
The king, my lord, should ask the prefects and the cohort commanders who are with them whether or not they have sold merchandise to the Egyptians. They are selling merchandise to the Egyptians, and the king, my lord, should know (this).
The king, my lord, should give an order to the prefects
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
... the king, my lord, sent ...
The city of Til-Barsip ...
... the city ... I settled ... people of the land ... I imposed upon them ... I imposed upon them ... I imposed upon them ... I imposed upon them ... I imposed upon them ...
... I gave to him
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did you not write to me?" I have written to the king, my lord, three or four times, but I have not seen an answer to my letter. Now, if the king, my lord, has sent a messenger to the son of Yakin, let him come and settle my case with him.
... are keeping watch over them
In the middle surface of the 'finger' there is a 'weapon'-mark which faces the base of the 'finger.'
x minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish belonging to Remanni-Adad, chariot driver,
The king of the land Elam heard about the conquest of his cities and fear fell upon him. He brought (the people of) the rest of his cities into fortresses. He abandoned the city Madaktu, his royal city, and took the road to the city Ḫaydala, which is in the distant mountains. He ascended Mount Bikni, a rugged mountain, and pitched camp (there). The people of the cities Susa, Pidilma, (and) Bubilu, cities that were on the border of his land, came down from the mountains
Witness Nabû-šumu-lešir, chariot driver.
... he sent him ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, (or) has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean...
Total 589 horses, 8 mules.
Palace of Sargon (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, favorite of the great gods.
Should Assurbanipal, crown prince of the Succession Palace, drink this drug which is placed before your great divinity, and in drinking this drug will he be rescued and spared?
If Venus disappears in the east: the days of the king will become long.
I have heard that the chief of the masons has come and said: "I will go and speak with the king's men about the work assignment. Let them give me a written order, and I will go and speak with them."
I have sent ...
14 ... ;
Nabû-šar-ahhešu;
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, scribe.
... I sent my eunuch Aššur-šarru-ibni ... to the city ... , saying: "Go and bring down the people of the city ... and settle them in the city ... !" He went and brought down the people of the city ... , but he did not bring down the people of the city ...
Now, if it is agreeable to the king, my lord, let them give me the order, and I will do accordingly.
I took the hand of the goddess Ištar, my lady, and made (her) enter into (the city of) Nineveh.
8 'litres' ...
The scouts of the Urarṭian have come out and said: "The Urarṭian has been defeated on his expedition against the Cimmerians."
(and) the rest
... I mustered my troops. I marched to the land ... I conquered the city ... I carried off their booty, possessions, (and) property. I marched to the land Ulluba. I conquered the city Ulluba. I carried off their booty, possessions, (and) property. I marched to the land Mannea. I conquered the city Išpakāia. I carried off their booty, possessions, (and) property.
the lands of ...
I mustered my chariotry (and) troops (and) marched to the land Ḫabḫu. I conquered the cities of the land Ḫabḫu. I carried off their booty, possessions, (and) property. I razed, destroyed, (and) burned their cities. I turned around (lit. “I turned the front of my yoke”) and took the road to the land of the Lullumu. I conquered the cities of the land of the Lullumu. I carried off their booty, possessions, (and
Concerning the ... of the Itu'eans about which you wrote, I have sent word, and they are bringing them. They will bring 100 oxen and 100 sheep.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
The people of the city Tumurrum, who live on Mount Nipur, a rugged mountain, and who had not bowed down to the yoke — I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the city Tumurrum. I carried off 200 of their fighting men, together with their property, their goods, their possessions, their oxen, (and) their sheep and goats, without number. I set fire to the temple of the god Adad, their lord, and reduced (it) to ashes. I took the god Adad, together with his
1 ditto, ditto, the fringe ... ;
... of the king ...
Witness Mannu-ki-Ninua, ...
... Now then
If the moon and sun are in opposition: the king of the land will widen his understanding; he will make stable the foundation of his throne.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether these men or their sons or their grandsons or their brothers or their nephews or their prefect or their cohort commander or their labour-duty superior,
Witness Nabû-šallimšunu.
you ...
I am one who fears you, Assurbanipal. I am one who reveres you. I am one who is assiduous towards your sanctuaries. I am one who prays to you daily for the good health of Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, and for the good health of his brothers.
from the town of ...
To the goddess Ištar, mistress of the lands, his lady: Adad-nārārī, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Arik-dīn-ili, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Enlil-nārārī (who was) also king of the universe (and) king of Assyria, ... , renovated Eḫursaggalkurkurra, the temple of highest rank, for the sake of his life, and made (it) shine like daylight.
The 17th day, when the king goes down to the House of God.
... -ahhe-iddina has contracted and bought it for 1 1/2 minas of silver.
To the king of the lands, my lord: your servant Bel-ušezib. May Bel, Nabû and Šamaš bless the king, my lord!
... Merodach-Baladan ...
... of the river ...
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Westlander will defeat Subartu in battle.
The messenger of the ... has come to me, saying: "The Itu'eans have  gone to the other side (of the river)." I have sent my messenger to the other side.
scribe.
... will go
I have not yet heard the details of what they have done in the Palace. When I have heard, I shall write to the king, my lord, whatever there is to report. I shall also send a detailed report to the Palace.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Total, 1: the 'residence' of Zeru-ken.
Disregard that the day is overcast and it is raining...
the men ...
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
... Ištar ...
Nabû-šarru-uṣur, ...
Seal of Nabû-ahhe-šallim, son of Nabû-zeru-lešir,
If Venus disappears in the east in the region of Orion: the king of the Westland will fall in battle ...
If a fog rolls in Tebet (X): the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland; a foreigner will rule the Westland.
... we have weighed.
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Witness Aplu-uṣur, son of Nur-šarru-uṣur, ...
The gods of the house of Bel-labria have been provided with food and drink. The offerings of the house of Gula have been made. The sacrifices of the house of Šarrat-nipha have been performed.
If a meteor flashes from east to west: attack of the enemy.
200 tubes;
Witness ...
before ...
... now ...
... the prefect of the Itu'eans ...
If on the 15th day the moon and sun are seen together: a strong enemy will raise his weapons against the king; the king will be shut up in his palace for the length of a month; the step of the enemy will be set towards his land; the enemy will march around victoriously in his land.
If Mars stands in the east: attack of the enemy against the land; the enemy will plunder the land.
an estate of 1 hectare 2 decares of orchard ... ;
... his people
May Sin, light of heaven and earth, clothe you with leprosy and forbid your entering into the presence of the gods or king.
10 hectares, ditto, ditto, the town of ... ;
Sasu, his servant —
... field in the village of Abdi-Kububi
Jupiter stood in the halo of the moon.
From Bulluṭu.
Nergal-bessunu, slave of the chief scribe —
... saw ...
the day ...
I had a causeway constructed opposite the Citadel Gate with paving stones of white limestone for the passage of my lordly chariot. I had a palace of elephant ivory, ebony, boxwood, musukkannu-wood, cedar, cypress, juniper, and terebinth, (a palace that I named) Egalzagdinutukua (“The Palace Without a Rival”), constructed thereon as my royal residence.
... , x minas of wool, of Mannu-ki-Adad, ...
2 shekels for 2 ... -garments;
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, have changed or altered the proceedings, or (that) the oracle query has become jumbled in my mouth...
Tiglath-pileser, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, king of all the four quarters, conqueror of the lands Nairi from the land Tummu to the land Daiēnu, conqueror of the lands Ḫabḫu, Ḫarḫar, (and) Ḫarḫar of the land Ḫatti, conqueror of the lands of the Šubaru and the land Nirbu, conqueror of the land of the Qumānu, conqueror of
The palace of Ashurnasirpal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria; valiant man who acts with the support of Aššur, his lord, and has no rival among the princes of the four quarters, marvelous shepherd
... of the king, my lord, who went to the land of Laqû, has returned from the land of Laqû and said to me: "The king of the land of Sūḫu has attacked the city of Aššur-belu-taqqin and taken prisoners. The king of the land of Sūḫu has come to the aid of Aššur-belu-taqqin.
Town of Til-Barsip of the house of Ilu-ibni.
... Eṭeru
The magnates of the king, my lord, are doing very well.
On the 2nd day ...
Month Nisan (I), 22nd day, eponym year of Dananu.
Month ... , 8th day, eponym year of Aššur-da''inanni.
Total 88 men ...
The people of the land Bīt-Ḫumria (Israel), the people of the land Bīt-Ḫazaʾili (Damascus), the people of the land Bīt-Amukāni (Aramu), the people of the land Bīt-Šilāni (Judah), the people of the land Bīt-Šaʾalli (Ashdod), the people of the land Bīt-Barrūa, the people of the land Bīt-Zualzaš, the people of the land
Witness Sin-ašared. Witness Tarditu-Aššur.
The king, my lord, should send word that they should be shown a house in Nineveh, and that they should live there and work there. The king, my lord, should send word that the governor of Arrapha should give them a house.
If a falcon hunts in a man's house: there will be deaths in the man's house.
... his feet ...
1, of Ariye, chief of the carpenters;
... they ...
... to ...
The servants of the king ... in the house of the governor ...
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, have jumbled the oracle query in my mouth, or changed (or) altered the proceedings...
and the wall ...
... are reliable
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ahhe-eriba. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
La-qepu, ...
... , ...
I have sent ... to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should ask him why he did not send ...
The king, my lord, should send word that they should be shown a house in Nineveh and live there, until their sons grow up and their ... s come.
Witness Banitu-belu-usur. Witness Urda-Nanaya.
... 7th day of the month of Sivan (III) ...
I am the king who reveres Aššur and the gods of Assyria, ... who is assiduous towards the shrines of the great gods, ... who is assiduous towards the shrines of the great gods, ... who is assiduous towards the shrines of the great gods, ... who is assiduous towards the shrines of the great gods, ... who is assiduous towards the shrines of the great gods, ... who is assiduous towards the shrines of the great gods, ... who is assiduous towards the shrines of the great gods, ... who is ass
To the king, my lord: your servant Šarru-emuranni. Good health to the king, my lord!
... the commandant
Balasî ...
and the troops of the ...
Witness NN.
... the king, my lord
Witness Ibašši-ilu.
... of bronze
of the king, my lord, ...
Bel-na'id, gardener; Naqabaya, gardener; 1 woman; 1 daughter of 4 spans' height; 1, of 3 spans' height: a total of 5 people.
I brought Gambulu, together with his wife, his sons, his daughters, his possessions, (and) his property, out of that city alive. I brought out silver, gold, property, (and) the treasures of his palace and I counted (it) as booty. I brought out eunuchs, his attendants, engineers, (and) his food preparers and I counted (them) as booty. I brought out all of (his) artisans, as many as there were, the bond of city and steppe, and I counted (them) as boot
Perhaps my lord will say: "What is the news of the Urarṭian?" He is in Ṭurušpâ. The king, my lord, can be glad.
The king sent a letter to me, saying: "Let the magnates come and enter the fort." They have come and entered the fort. Now, if the king, my lord, commands, they should go and enter the house of the palace herald.
... three ...
An estate of 1 hectare 5 decares of field adjoining the road of Bel-ibni, adjoining the field of Bel-ibni, adjoining the field of Bel-ibni.
Concerning the king my lord's subjects who are in the service of the chief cupbearer, about whom the king my lord gave me orders, I have sent them to the king my lord's presence.
20 hectares of land, 10,000 vines, in the town of Ṭab-šar-Aššur;
... mules of the town of Kilizi
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord!
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "... to the city of Akkad ...
... the Chaldeans ...
... of the whole mountain range
May Ea, king of the Abyss, lord of the springs, let you drink poison from a ...
... to their place ...
Concerning the king my lord's subjects who were deportees, 300 of them have come in today. I have given 300 men to the  palace superintendent, 300 to the chief cupbearer, and 300 to the  palace superintendent of the crown prince. I have given out 1,000 men, but  there are still 500 men left. I have sent them to the king, my lord.
I have given to the shepherds 1,000 sheep, 1,000 ewes, 1,000 lambs, and 1,000 cows.
which in the palace of the king ...
Adad-nerari (III), king of Assyria, overseer, son of Šamši-Adad (V), king of Assyria, overseer, son of Shalmaneser (III), king of Assyria, likewise overseer.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
From Rašil the older, servant of the king.
All this from before Aššur.
Total 101 — (governor of) Calah.
until ...
... one who is with the king ...
total, the town of Dannaya, ...
... shekels of silver for ...
... concerning the king, my lord
From Balasî.
... to the king
... I will go
1 writing-board ...
The herald is responsible for ...
When the king of Elam heard about the conquest of his cities, terror and fear fell upon him. He brought (his) daughter, together with a substantial dowry, to Nineveh to serve as a housekeeper, and he kissed my feet.
... I have not yet received the horses from ... ; as soon as I have received them, I shall write to the king, my lord.
I have written down ...
... the king ... the Itu'eans ...
... he appointed him ...
The lower part is elevated ...
The hand of Aššur-šallimanni,
Just as the king, your father, has done, let the king, your father, do as he deems best.
... upon it
Concerning the bull colossi of Aššur about which the king wrote to me, I have finished the first bull colossus and am working on the second one.
As to Bel-ahhe-eriba, the haruspex about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me, I have now questioned him in the presence of the king, my lord. He said: "I have heard from the mouth of the king, my lord, that he is to be exempted. I have written to the Palace about him, and they have given me the following order: 'Write down his report and send it to me.'"
Witness Aššur-reṣuwa, eunuch of the queen.
... this ...
... the king, my lord, is the king of kings. May the king, my lord, live forever!
... of ...
of the bed ...
Witness Šamaš-šarru-ibni.
To the god Aššur, his lord: Sargon (II), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, presented (this object) for the sake of his life.
and Nabû-šallim ...
Nabû-šezibanni, the haruspex, has said: "The king will die."
the messenger of ...
I have sent my messenger to the son of Yakin, telling him: "Come to the Inner City for an audience with the king!"
... the New House ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
The king, my lord, should ask the ... official whether or not he has given the  (king's) order to the son of Yakin.
The ... s of the land of ... have been sold for silver. The king, my lord, should know (this).
He said: "Nabû-šezibanni ...
NN, farmer, and his people; ... -dabit, farmer, and his people;
Witness Zarutî, cohort commander.
Marduk-šumu-iddina, ...
... the magnates of the king
Witness Abi-ram, ...
I tore down that small palace in its entirety, then I changed the course of the Tebilti River, repaired (the effects of) the erosion, and directed its outflow.
And concerning the news of the son of Yakin: he is in Babylon. He has not yet come out, and we have not heard any news about him yet.
Month Tishri (VII), ... th day, eponym year of Nabû-belu-uṣur.
If the moon is surrounded by a halo, and Saturn stands in it: the king of Akkad will be shut up.
I am the Great Lady. I am Ištar of Arbela. I will go before you and behind you. I will bring about the defeat of your enemy.
Witness Aplî.
The priest of Nabû, the priest of Tašmetu, the priest of Gula, the priest of Mar-biti, the priest of Zababa, the priest of Baba, the priest of Ea, the priest of Damkina, the priest of Ninurta, the priest of Nergal, the priest of Nusku, the priest of Mandanu, the priest of Nergal of the House of Aššur, the priest of Zababa of the House of Aššur, the priest of Ninurta of the House of Aššur,
Witness Qurdi-Issar, village manager.
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord.
Concerning the town of Dibirati about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... the town of Dibirati ...
... the Laqean(s)
all that you have ...
... and the enemy will not come near to them.
10 ... ;
... their ... s are with them ...
... ditto, white;
Ištar of Arbela has gone out and come in again.
In the future, may one of the sons, grandsons, (great grand)sons, (great, great grand)sons, (great, great, great grand)sons, (great, great, great, great grand)sons, (great, great, great, great grand)sons, (great, great, great, great grand)sons, (great, great, great, great grand)sons, (great, great, great, great grand)sons, (great, great, great, great grand)sons,
Witness Sama', ditto. Witness Bel-le'i, ditto.
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The king's word to the governors: I am well; you can be glad.
If the sun rises and its left side is dark: the king of the land will ...
Witness Nuhšaya, porter.
1, the goddess Ištar, mistress of the city Arbela, who resides in the city Arbela;
... and the ... of his father's house ...
The scribes ... , the haruspices ... , the exorcists ... , the physicians ...
2 ... ;
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
As to what you wrote: "The king, my lord, should not go outdoors on an evil day" — the day you wrote this letter to me, was it not a good day to go out? Now, if you say: "It is not a good day to go out" — why then would I go out on an evil day? I am going out tomorrow, and I shall come back and enter my palace. May the gods of heaven and earth bless the king, my lord, and may they give you, your palace and your country in good health.
Nabû-na'id, the son of Sin-aplu-iddina, the son of Nabû-šuma-ereš, the son of Nabû-šuma-ereš, the son of Nabû-šuma-ereš, the son of Nabû-šuma-ereš, the son of Nabû-šuma-ereš, the son of Nabû-šuma-ereš, the son of Nabû-šuma-ereš, the son of Nabû-šuma-ereš, the son of Nab
Bel-iqišanni,
Witness NN. Witness Barruqu.
I have sent ... to you; do not be negligent ...
Witness Ququî.
all to ...
Concerning the farmer of the ...
Performed in the month of Shebat (XI).
Total — the man from Assyria.
who is in charge of ...
The people of all the temples are exempt.
The king, my lord, should not be concerned about it.
A tablet of the palace scribe to the palace scribe, his lord. May the great gods ...
I have sent word; they are bringing him right now ...
Nabû-eriba, son of Šamaš-šumu-iddina, ...
I will not give the silver.
Total 23 horses,
Month Ab (V), 18th day, eponym year of ...
The king, my lord, knows that the governor of Arrapha is a servant of the king, my lord. He has sent a letter to NN, saying: "...
... the men of Nanî ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-šumu-ka''in. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and DN bless the king, my lord!
The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number.
If you should sin against this treaty of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, concerning Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, concerning his brothers, sons by the same mother as Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, concerning the other sons of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, concerning the rest of the sons of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, concerning Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, concerning the rest of the sons of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, concerning
If he appoints him, will he make common cause with Šamaš-šumu-ukin?
1 bowl of silver;
In the time of Ashurbanipal, king of Assyria, my lord, the gods Aššur, Šamaš, and Marduk, the great gods, my lords, decreed a fate without equal for me. They gave me the scepter, throne, and staff for shepherding the land and people; they gave me the crown, the tiara, and the royal appurtenance(s) for ruling the land and people.
NN, ditto;
... in this manner
The king, my lord, should ask the scribe of the palace whether or not I have given the horses to the king, my lord. I have not given a single horse to the king, my lord.
straw ...
The king, my lord, should ask the ... s who are with him.
Nabû-šumu-lešir, scribe, keeper of the contract.
The name of the first son of Sennacherib is Aššur-ilī-muballissu.
... to my lord
... Bit-Amukani ...
which he/they ...
... I am sending ...
... anyone
Concerning the offerings for the gods of the king, my lord, about which the king, my lord, wrote to me,
I had a stele made, had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the great gods, my lords, written on it, and I erected (it) in (that) city.
I have written to the Palace about the towns of the Itu'eans which the king, my lord, entrusted to me. I have appointed a 'third man' in charge of them, and he is doing the king's work. The Itu'eans have come to me, saying: 'The king has given us the towns of the Palace.' I have told them: 'The king has given them to me, and I have appointed a 'third man' in charge of them.'
Witness Nabû-balassu-iqbi, chariot owner.
The money is paid completely. That field is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Witness NN, ... of the city of Nineveh.
... the eclipse of Mars will pass by.
If the Frond star comes close to the top of the moon and stands there: the king will live for many days, but his land will not prosper.
... garden ...
their blood ...
... Aššur-šarru-uṣur
To the king, my lord: your servant Mannu-ki-Adad. Good health to the king, my lord!
... them
Concerning the news of Bel-iddina, the king, my lord, should ask the ...
Witness NN, 'third man' of the magnates.
Thirty-two kings of the land Yāʾ, a region of the land Yadnana (Cyprus), which is in the midst of the sea, heard of the might of the gods Aššur, Nabû, (and) Marduk, my lords, and bowed down to my yoke. They brought (their) daughters, their own offspring, to Nineveh to serve as housekeepers, together with a substantial dowry and a large marriage gift, and they kissed my feet.
Ditto, ditto; just as a snake and a mongoose do not enter the same hole to lie there together but think only of cutting each other's throat, so may you and your women not enter the same room to lie down in the same bed.
to the king, my lord ...
... , x persons; NN, ...
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Sagab (651).
the new regular offerings ...
Seal of Šarru-... ,
Nabû-balassu-iqbi
... the 2nd day;
I have heard that they are plotting to kill me. I am not afraid, though. I will go where the king sends me to, and I will come back and stay in my house.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... the people of the city ...
the Itu'eans ...
Apladad-... , witness Ba... , witness Ba...
... Belet-ili ...
The messenger of the king of Elam has come to Assyria, and I have sent him to the Palace.
I had a palace of elephant ivory, ebony, boxwood, musukkannu-wood, cedar, cypress, juniper, and terebinth, (a palace that I named) Egalzagdinutukua (“The Palace Without a Rival”), constructed thereon as my royal residence.
... the Itu'eans ... the Itu'eans in the territory of the king.
Disregard that ... to the men ...
... the Hittites ... of Šamaš-ilai.
Your servant NN: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! May Bel and Nabû bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
If the moon becomes visible in Sivan (III) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
Witness Nabû-na'id, horse trainer of the palace.
The man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity ...
I sent a messenger to the son of Yakin, saying: "Let me see your face, and let me come and ... the land of Akkad." He did not agree to see his face ...
The people of the city ... , who had fled before me and grasped the feet of the god Aššur, my lord, came up to me and kissed my feet. I made them swear an oath by the great gods and I gave them back their city. I settled them in their city and ... I appointed ... eunuchs of mine as provincial governors over them. I ... the city ...
If the moon and sun are in opposition: the king of the land will widen his understanding.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
... the king's subjects who are in the service of the king, my lord, ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
I have heard that the son of Yakin has entered ... , and is doing the work.
the forts ...
... the fort ...
Rīmūt-ilī, ... ;
Witness Šumma-ilani.
1 prayer bowl ditto;
And now, the king has sent a royal bodyguard to the village manager of the chief cupbearer, saying: "Give him the people of the house of Aššur-naṣir!"
... Now the king should do as he deems best.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
May a later prince, when that temple becomes dilapidated and he restores (it), restore my inscribed name and my monumental inscriptions to their places. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
I have heard that the son of Yakin has come and is staying in Bit-Dakuri. I have sent word, and they are bringing him to the Palace.
5 talents, the (province of) the chief of trade.
I appointed over them Bēl-ibni, a son of a rab banî (and) a scion of Šuanna (Babylon), who had grown up like a young puppy in my palace, as king of the land of Sumer and Akkad.
1 wooden cupboard, polished:
Month Iyyar (II), 1st day, eponym year of Kanunayu, governor of the New Palace.
The king, my lord, should send word that they should be shown a house in Nineveh and live there, and that their sons should be sent to the palace to serve as housekeepers. They should live there for as long as the king, my lord, lives.
By the command of the god Aššur, the great lord, my lord, I mustered my troops (and) took the direct road against Teumman, the king of the land Elam. (iv 15) I marched as far as the city Bīt-Imbî, his fortified city. He saw the assault of my battle array and abandoned the city Bīt-Imbî; he fled to the city Dūr-Undāsi, which is in the midst of the sea. I conquered that city (iv 20) (and) carried off
... the goddess Ištar
Month of the moon, 30th day, eponym year of Ša-Adad-aninu.
Witness Bel-abu'a.
NN, ... of the chief ... , has contracted and bought it for x minas of silver.
7 big loaves;
I have sent my messenger to them, but they have not agreed to come out.
I have appointed a guard with the silver, gold, and precious stones in the fortress of the Assyrians, and I have also appointed a guard with the horses in the town of the Assyrians.
At that time, the wall of Nineveh which Aššur-nādin-aḫḫē, my forefather, had previously built — that wall had become dilapidated and I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I completely rebuilt that wall from top to bottom. I made it 40 bricks thick. I made it 120 courses of brick high. I made it 100 courses of brick wide. I made it 200 courses of brick long. I made it 200 courses of brick wide. I made
... the Babylonians ...
The palace herald and the chief scribe have come to me, saying: "The king has sent us to you; come and conclude the treaty with us."
I have written to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should do as he deems best.
he is my father's son ...
Witness NN, royal bodyguard.
to Mullissu ...
... the gods of the king ... the king ...
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur, eunuch.
The priest of Anu ... has seized me, saying: "The king, my lord, ... the bull colossus ...
The men who were taken away have not come back ...
Adad-apla-iddina, king of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, the one who renovates Esagil and Ezida, son of Merodach-Baladan, king of Babylon, son of Bēl-iqīša, (who was) also king of Babylon:
The king, my lord, should ask the elders of the country whether or not they have sold (them).
On the 13th day, at night, they light a fire in the courtyard of the house of Anu. They throw balussu on it, and sing, “... , Lord of the Lands.”
... the land ... I settled them there. I imposed upon them tax (and) tribute, (and) considered them as inhabitants of Assyria. I imposed upon them ... and they pulled my yoke.
Witness ... a.
In the future may a later prince, when that wall becomes old and dilapidated, restore it. May he restore my inscribed name to its place. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
I am the Lady of Arbela. I am the mother of the king.
Concerning the news of the king of Elam, he has set out from Bit-Imbî and gone to Bit-Yakin. The messenger of the king of Babylon has gone to Bit-Yakin with him.
If the sky shouts and ...
The scribe of the house of Aššur-ila'i has written to me: "The king has given me the following order: 'Write to the scribe of the house of Aššur-šallim that he should bring the tablet of the king to the review.'
I wrote to him: "Let me come and see the face of Aššur-belu-taqqin, and let me come back and tell the king, my lord, how it is." He said: "I will not let you go out of my presence until I have brought the king's tribute with me."
Seal of Nabû-ahhe-riba, scribe.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
May the goddesses who reside in your city ...
... -ilu, son of Nabû-aplu-iddina, ditto; 1 woman: a total of 2 people.
2,000 ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "The gods of the king of the lands have been very kind to the king, my lord" —
a ditto of wine;
The chief cupbearer of Aššur gives 1 homer of wine and 1 homer of beer for the regular offering of Aššur.
Mannu-ki-...
You ... the oxen ...
... he has sent to me.
... his face
Good health to my lord!
The very best of health to the crown prince, my lord!
... the elders of the land of Zamua
Ubru-Nabû, farmer; 1 woman; 1 daughter, of 4 spans' height; 1, of 3 spans' height: a total of 4 people.
... the son of Anu
The king's word to the magnates and the servants of Aššur-etel-ilani: I am well; you can be glad. May Aššur, Bel, Nabû, Šamaš, Ištar of Nineveh, and Ištar of Arbela bless the king, my lord.
In the future, at any time, whether Aššur-reṣuwa or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or his prefect or the mayor of his city or the governor of his province or the commander of his troops or the king of Elam or the king of Babylon or the king of GN or the king of GN or the king of GN or the king of GN or the king of GN or the king of GN or the king of GN or the king of GN or the king of GN or the king of GN
Mannu-ki-... , the ... , and the ... s of the king's sons, the ... , and the ...
Bel-lu-balaṭ, the chief cupbearer, has come and said: "I am going to the review. Let me go and see the king's face."
I tore down that small palace in its entirety, then I changed the course of the Tebilti River, repaired (the effects of) the erosion, and directed its outflow.
... the king, my lord
Witness Kisiya.
Witness Abdi-Dadi, palace farmer of the queen.
A tablet of ... -ereš to the king, my lord. Good health to the king, my lord!
The 'weapon'-mark of the 'increment' rises to the left.
Month Nisan (I), eponym year of Ša-Nabû-šû.
... they have appointed ...
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did you not write to me?" I have written to the king, my lord, three or four times, but I have not seen an answer to my letter. Now, if the king, my lord, so orders, I will write to the king, my lord, again.
Witness NN.
20,000 stalks of vine in the town of Gadisê;
Witness ... -Nabû.
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me, the ... of the crown prince of Babylon is in the presence of the chief eunuch. He is bringing the ... to the king, my lord.
The king, my lord, should not say: "Why did you not write to me?" I have written to the king, my lord, three or four times, but have seen no answer.
... of Nabû-šumu-iddina, the scribe of the New Palace.
1 seah 1 'litre' of spiced bread; a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
... water for the days
... the sun
Son of Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), offspring of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad; descendant of Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, ... descendant of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad; ...
... the name of the king
... the palace herald
Disregard what they speak with their mouths, or what they think...
... to Nabû'a
Now, if it is agreeable to the king, my lord, let them give me a horse so that I can go and bring it.
I sent my officials, the governors of the border areas of their land, against them. They brought about their defeat. They struck down with the sword the people of the land of the Arabs, as many as had risen up against me. They did not spare a single one. They hung their corpses on poles and placed (them) around the city.
An estate of 1 hectare ... adjoining ...
... they have appointed ...
... the king's flag should not be removed from ...
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
Bel and Nabû ...
If a meteor flashes from the east to the west: ... will rule the land.
The palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe.
May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May Aššur, Bel and Nabû give happiness and physical well-being to the king, my lord!
Witness Mannu-ki-Adad, royal bodyguard.
The king, my lord, should give orders that they should bring the rest of the tribute and that they should bring it to the king, my lord.
Nabû-kenu-uṣur,
The cities Bīt-Kilamzaḫ, Ḫardišpu, (and) Bīt-Kubatti, their fortified walled cities, together with the small(er) settlements in their environs, which are situated like the nests of eagles, the foremost of birds, on the peak of Mount Nipur, a rugged mountain, and which the Manneans had conquered in the time of the kings, my ancestors, I conquered those settlements. I tore the land Mannea apart from within. I carried off to Assyria
If the moon becomes visible in Nisan (I) on the 30th day: dispersal of the land.
... Kunaya, the ...
... I am a servant of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, and I am devoted to Assurbanipal, the crown prince of the Succession Palace.
Witness Susî.
The palace herald and the cohort commander of the governor of Calah have come to me, saying: "The king, our lord, has given us the following order: 'You will go to Arrapha and stay there; I will come to you.'"
I did not see ...
I have written to you; do not be negligent.
As to the wine about which you wrote, it is good that you wrote and informed me. I shall send word that they bring it.
Witness Zarutî, chariot driver of the crown prince.
... my ...
Witness Sin-zeru-ibni, ...
Fingernail of Nabû-hamatua, owner of the garden and the people being sold.
the people of ...
If a planet stands at the left horn of the moon: the king will exercise world dominion; his land will expand.
The palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of Assyria: (this is) the audience gift that Karib-il, king of the land Saba, presented to me. Whoever places (it) in the service of a god (or another) person (or) erases my inscribed name, may the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Ad
I have heard that ...
... the bed
... the god Nabû of ...
Total, of the estate of NN, chief singer of the Assyrian Ištar.
Does your great divinity know it? Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Witness Ilu-le'i, cohort commander.
... I brought ... to Assyria. I settled ... in peaceful dwellings... I made ... dwell in security. I made the people of Assyria, great and small, bow down at my feet and they (now) pull my yoke. I made the land of the Qutu, the land of the Uqumanu, the lands Parsuaš, Anzan, Pašeru, (and) Ellipi, (and) the entirety of Mount Kašiiari, which is before the land Nairi, bow down at my feet.
If the earth quakes all day: dispersal of the land.
The 'station' is present. The 'path' on the left ...
they go ...
... anyone ...
... Babylon ...
of Nabû-bel-šumati ...
The prefects of the city-rulers of the cities of the country have come to me, saying: "The king has given us 1,000 sheep from the treasurer of the Aššur temple, but the city-rulers of the country are appropriating them from us."
I, Sîn-šarra-iškun, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, wise prince, circumspect ruler, shepherd of the people, (and) leader of a widespread population, I:
x+20 hectares of field in the village of ... ,
From Zakir.
Shalmaneser, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria:
Witness ...
I, Sîn-šarra-iškun, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the god Aššur, chosen of the god Enlil, trusted prince, favorite of the goddess Ištar, beloved of the god Marduk, the one who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, am I —
... Aššur-ila'i
Witness Ahabû.
5 towers, 52 55 54 53 brick-courses — (governor of) Calah.
If the moon becomes visible in the path of the Anu stars: there will be a flood.
Witness Marduk-na'id, son of ...
... ni, son of NN, servant of NN —
... 16 talents of flax;
Month Adar (XII), 10th day, eponym year of Mar-larim.
On the 13th day the king went up to the House of God. He performed the regular offering before Aššur and Mullissu. He seated the chanters and retired to the side room. He returned and made the chanters rise.
adjoining ...
... Babylon
or Muqallil-kabti ...
Witness Erba-Adad.
Ditto by all the gods of Arbela!
By the command of the god Aššur, the great lord, my lord, I marched to the land Ḫabḫu. I conquered the city Tīl-Garimme, which is on the border of the land Ḫabḫu. I carried off its booty (and) possessions (and) brought (them) to my city Aššur.
6 oxen ...
... the gods on account of it ...
... his ...
adjoining the field of Nabû-duru-uṣur,
The name of the son of Kiṣir-Aššur is Aššur-ilu.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. Good health to the king, my lord!
If a fog rolls in Shebat (XI): the land will go to ruin.
Why have you not written?"
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. The very  best of health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the  king, my lord!
from the town of Dad...
If a planet rises in Elul (VI): rising of business, thriving of grain.
The chief of the scouts of the king, my lord, has come and said: "I have been sent to you; come and speak with the elders of Bit-Amukani! They are plotting to kill you, and you are plotting to kill them."
1 ditto, 1 seah — Mar-larim
I have received the tribute of the king of Elam, 20 horses, 2 mules, 10 donkeys, 5 camels, 5 oxen, and 500 sheep. I have also received the tribute of the king of Gaza, 100 sheep, 50 donkeys, 5 camels, 50 oxen, and 1,000 sheep.
I have received the horses and ... ed them. The ... horses which were in ... are at my disposal. The ... horses which were in ...
... to the elders ...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the magnates and governors, men, horses and army of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, who are going to collect tribute and tax from the land of the people of Cilicia,
of Su...
The deputy (governor)
If the earth quakes at night: worry for the land; abandonment of the land.
At that time, the temple of the goddess Ištar, mistress of the lands, my mistress, which Ilu-šumma, my forefather, had previously built — that temple had become dilapidated and I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I completely rebuilt that temple from top to bottom.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... the land of Sikris
The king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let them be told that they must not cut off the timber supply from the country of Laqû." But they have cut off the timber supply from the country of Laqû, and they have also cut off the timber supply from the country of Sūḫu. They have cut off the timber supply from the country of Zamua, too, and from the country of Bīt-Adini. They have cut off the timber supply from the country of Bīt-Šilāni, too, and from the country of B
... the magnates
at the disposal of Nabû-zeru-lešir, mayor of Nineveh.
Your servant Ana-Nabû-taklak: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: I have sent my messenger to greet the king, the horses and the soldiers.
Witness Aširanu.
I have written to the king, my lord, that the king, my lord, may know that I am not negligent in my duty. I have written to the king, my lord, that the king, my lord, may know that I am not negligent in my duty. I have written to the king, my lord, that I may not die of hunger. I have written to the king, my lord, that I may not die of thirst.
Witness Nabû-ahu-uṣur, scribe.
Concerning the ritual about which the king, my lord, wrote to me, it is (indeed) a complicated one. Let the king, my lord, write to his servant what is suitable.
2, Aššur-iddina, cohort commander of the chief treasurer;
If the 'well-being' is destroyed, (then) the 'path' on the left of the gall bladder is present.
Total 4 men, servants of Sin-ila'i.
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-alik-pani. Good health to the king, my lord!
I have sent two letters to the Palace, but have not heard an answer ...
If Adad thunders in the middle of Shebat (XI): the harvest of the land will prosper ...
Month Adar (XII), 22nd day, eponym year of Abi-ul-idi, chief vizier.
I sent my eunuchs and my officials against them, and they trampled the people living in those cities, (and) turned (them) into mounds of ruins. They carried off as booty at the same time (both) the people — young (and) old — who lived in those cities, as many as there were, (and) the gods who helped them; they did not allow a (single) person to escape.
in all 5 persons, belonging to Abdi-Kurra —
I have now written to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should summon his servants and ask them why they have sold the horses for money. The king, my lord, should summon his servants and ask them why they have sold the horses for money.
For his life and the well-being of his city, its wall and gates which previously (other) kings who preceded me had built — it (the wall) had become dilapidated and I completely rebuilt it from top to bottom.
Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
I am now writing to you: if you do not wish to be implicated in this matter, speak up in the presence of the chief cupbearer, and let him send word that they should arrest the man who is writing to you.
12 shekels of silver for ... of Aššur;
I have no prebend, no seed corn, no oil, no honey, no wine, no beer, no ... , no straw, no reeds, no ... , no ...
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
... , Ilu-šumu-ka''in;
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial audience gift from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
until the king ...
... of ...
I have written down his report ...
11 shekels of silver of ...
The sons of Sîn-šarra-iškun, who are in the presence of the king, my lord, are (now) staying in the king's presence.
Total, ...
1 ... ;
If the moon at its appearance wears a crown: the king will reach the highest rank. — It becomes visible on the 1st day.
1 cow of silver;
I have heard that they have gone to the river bank; they are ... ing the river ...
... the land of the king of Elam
... I made ... and I settled them there. I imposed upon them tax, tribute, (and) corvée. I set up my royal image in the land of the Lullumu. I conquered the lands Ḫabḫu (and) Zamua. I subdued the lands Namri, Bīt-Sangibūti, Bīt-Ḫamban, Sumurzu, Bīt-Barrūa, Bīt-Zualzaš, (and) Bīt-Matti. I imposed upon them tax,
(As for) the one who removes my inscriptions and my name: May the goddess Ištar, my mistress, extinguish his sovereignty, break his weapon, cause his manhood to dwindle away, (and) hand him over to his enemies. May the goddess Ištar, my mistress, bring about the defeat of his land. May he not stand firm before his enemy. May the goddess Ištar, my mistress, make his land small (and) constrict his manhood. May she hand him over to his enemies.
I have not yet heard the details of the matter which you wrote to me about. I am now sending Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, to the presence of the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, question him, and let him tell the king, my lord, whatever there is to report.
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Westlander will defeat Subartu in battle.
2 minas of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, goldsmith.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
the son of Uqur-suri
Instead of their seals they impressed their fingernails.
Peace is between them.
O Anu and Antu, the Great Gods, the Narudi, the Twins, the Pleiades, the gods of the steppe, the gods of the desert, the gods of the city, the gods of the land, the gods of the city of Aššur, the gods of the land of Akkad, the gods of the land of Sumer and Akkad, the gods of the land of Elam, the gods of the land of Gambulu, the gods of the land of Meluḫḫa, the gods of the land of Šamaš, the gods of
Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, who is now ill, and on whom the 'hand' of god Nanaya of Uruk is being 'placed' in extispicy, and (whom) your great divinity knows —
in the middle of ...
Dannaya, reporter.
The palace herald.
... the city of Der ...
The one who is present shall pay the ... in full.
... Month Adar (XII), 22nd day, eponym year of NN.
The 27th day, when the god is seen with the god ... : the god ...
... have sent
Aššur-bēl-kala has given (them) to Aššur-bēl-šamê.
... the king, my lord, ...
In the eponymy of Aššur-dān (648), I marched a second time to the land Ḫabḫu.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
The king should ask the palace scribe whether or not he has given (any)  bribes to the king.
... s
The commander-in-chief, the deputy, the chief of the 'third men,' the chief of the 'third men' of the palace, the chief of the 'third men' of the ša-šēpi guard, the chief of the 'third men' of the ša-šēpi guard of the ša-šēpi guard, the chief of the 'third men' of the ša-šēpi guard of the ša-šēpi guard of the ša-šēpi guard, the chief of the 'third men' of the ša-šēpi
... should go
I have written to the king, my lord, that the king, my lord, may know (about it). If the king, my lord, commands, I shall send the king's men to the Palace to do the work. The king, my lord, should know (this) so that the king, my lord, will not say: "Why did you not write to me?"
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... Arrapha ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
NN has contracted and bought it from Mušallim-...
... the people of the city of Kummuh, the people of the city of ... , the people of the city of Ḫarḫar, the people of the city of Uppumu, the people of the city of Kulimmeri, the people of the city of Ḫarḫar, the people of the city of Uppumu, the people of the city of Kulimmeri, the people of the city of Andia, the people of the city of Zakruti,
To the king, my lord: your servant Issar-nadin-apli, the foreman of the collegium of ten (scribes) of Arbela. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
6 towns ...
Witness Ilu-...
Aššur-da''in-šarru, ... ;
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
4 ... -men,
If the king, my lord, orders, I shall send (word) and they will bring (them).
8 polyptychs of ... , at the disposal of ...
... the exempted (soldiers)
This is from before Aššur.
Concerning the news of the Urarṭian about which my lord wrote to me: "What news of the Urarṭian has been heard?" — I have heard that he has gone to Waisi and is encamped there. I have not heard any news of him yet.
The day that the king, my lord, sent me to ... , I went and spoke with them, and they said to me as follows: "The king, my lord, has sent us to the city of Akkad. We are going to go and enter the city of Akkad."
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: good for Akkad, bad for Elam.
Month Iyyar (II), ... th day, eponym year of NN, governor of ...
... to my father ...
... I will go and see
... of the prelate ...
... of the magnates of the king
in my mouth ...
Witness Šumma-...
... the sheikh of the Arabs
In the month Sivan (III), on the 20th day, I sent Aššur-mukin-paleya, my eunuch, to the city Tyre. He went and spoke with Iaū-biʾdī (Ilu-biʾdī), the king of the city Tyre. Iaū-biʾdī sent his messengers to Nineveh to greet me. I received from them hostages, horses, (and) mules. I sent my eunuch to the city Tyre with (the following) message:
... of the land of Yadburu
they should do ...
... the father of their ...
I entered the pass of Mount Habruru (and) marched to the land Gilzānu. I conquered the city Bīt-Kilamzaḫ, their fortified city, whose location is situated between rivers. I brought out from it people, horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty.
Witness Mannu-ki-Arbail.
Aplaya, son of Rihani, ...
Nabû-šezibanni, son of Nanî, confectioner.
I decorated Emašmaš (and) Egašankalama with silver (and) gold, (and) filled (them) with splendor.
Afterwards, Teumman, the (very) image of a gallû-demon, sat on the throne of Urtaku. He constantly sought out evil (ways) to kill the children of Urtaku (and) the children of Ummanaldašu (Ḫumban-ḫaltaš II), the brother of Urtaku. Ummanigaš, Ummanappa, (and) Tammarītu — the sons of Urtaku, the king of the land Elam — Kudurru (and) Parrû — the sons of Ummanaldaš
Witness Tarhundapî.
Bel-dan,
4 sheep ... ;
... s, 4 seahs of flour
The son of Yakin has written to me: "... I am going to the Palace. Let me see the face of the king, my lord, and let me come back and ... the ... of the king, my lord, and the ... of the king, my lord, which I have heard ... "
The scribe shall not touch the sacrificial sheep, nor shall he ... the sacrificial sheep.
I sent my messenger to Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II) regarding these matters. He detained the eunuch of mine whom I had sent (Marduk-šarru-uṣur) and did not give a reply to my word(s).
Witness NN, ša šēpi guard.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, who is now ill, and on whom the 'hand' of god Nanaya of Uruk is being 'placed' in extispicy —
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in my mouth...
Witness Aššur-balliṭ, ditto.
... &  beer  &  ...
I took the road in pursuit of Tanutamon (and) I marched as far as the city Thebes, his fortified city. He saw the assault of my battle array and abandoned the city Thebes; he fled to the city Kipkipi. With the support of the god Aššur, my lord, I conquered that city (Thebes) in its entirety. I carried off 200,150 people, together with their possessions, their property, their goods, their gods, (and) their goddesses, without number. I burnt, razed
The 28th day: joy of heart.
30 ... at the disposal of NN
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhe, conscript.
... s at the disposal of the team commander
I pursued them on the peaks of the mountains and defeated them. I conquered, plundered, destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire their cities. Like tell(s) after the Deluge, I destroyed the land Bīt-Agusi (Arpad) in its entirety (and) turned (it) into a mound of ruins (lit. “a mound and ruins”). I carried off as booty at the same time (both) the people — young (and) old — who lived in the land Bīt-Agusi and the gods
Witness ...
5 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish, which the king, my lord, sent to Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the palace scribe, for the work of the king, and which he received.
Total, of the ... th day.
If anyone at any time in the future
6 bags of (mixed) kernels.
Ninurta-iddin,
The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number.
He said: "Nabû-ušabši ...
Total of the 'residences' of the cupbearers.
To the king, my lord: your servant PN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether these men or their sons or their grandsons or their brothers or their nephews or their prefect or their cohort commander or their neighbour or their relative or their ... , and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Šumma-ilani, his sons and grandsons,
8,000 (homers) of barley belonging to the king, my lord, which were given to the son of Zabinu, have been piled up in the town of the son of Zabinu. The son of Zabinu has gone to the king, my lord, saying: "I have 8,000 (homers) of barley piled up in the town of the son of Zabinu." The king, my lord, should send word that they bring the barley over here. The son of Zabinu should come and ...
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), leader of a widespread population, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, I: With limestone, stone from the mountains, I had the akītu-house of the steppe, which is inside Nineveh, built anew from its foundation(s) to its crenellations and I raised (it) as high as a mountain. I built inside it a palace for my royal
Total, 3: the 'residence' of the ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nadin-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord!
Ninurta-ilaya,
... the town of ...
... the city god
... upon them ...
Ešuddegeštuku, “House whose prayers are heard”: the house of Gula.
I, Adad-nārārī, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Arik-dīn-ili, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Enlil-nārārī (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of the god Aššur; valiant man who acts with the support of the gods Aššur, Šamaš,
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send me the news of the son of Yakin? Is he well?" — he is well, and the king, my lord, can be glad.
... the day when the god ... the god ... in the month of Shebat (XI)
I did not listen to him, did not accept his plea, did not turn back my anger from him, (and) did not relent towards him. I marched on to the land Ellipi and the city Carchemish, his royal city. Before my arrival, Ispabāra, their king, abandoned his fortified cities (and) his treasury and fled far away.
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
The palace of Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, king of the kings of (Lower) Egypt, Upper Egypt, (and) Kush, king of the four quarters, true shepherd, favorite of the great gods, guardian of truth who loves justice, renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the
1 female Corybante ... ;
... let them do
The servants of the city lords of the cities of Assur, Calah, Arbela, Dur-Šarruken, ... , who brought the tribute to Assyria, ...
with ...
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 21st day, eponym year of Dadî, treasurer.
The king, my lord, should send a messenger to come and have a look at the work. The king, my lord, should give orders to the chief of accounts to give the money to the treasurer of Aššur. The king, my lord, should know (this) and be happy.
... the goddess Ištar, mistress of the gods, ... the god Sîn, the light of heaven and earth, ... the god Šamaš, judge of heaven and earth, ... the god Adad, canal inspector of heaven and earth, ... the god Marduk, sage of the gods, ... the god Nabû, scribe of heaven and earth, ... the god Nergal, perfect one, ... the goddess Ištar, mistress of the gods, ... the goddess Ištar, mistress of the gods, ... the goddess Ištar, mist
(As for) the one who removes my inscriptions and my name: May the gods Aššur, Anu, Sîn, Šamaš, Adad, Marduk, Nabû, (and) Uraš, the gods who support me, overthrow his sovereignty, destroy his name and his seed from the land, (and) abandon him (and) his land. May the goddess Ištar, my mistress, bring about the defeat of his land. May he not stand firm before his enemy. May the god Adad strike his land with terrible lightning
The king, my lord, knows that the towns of the magnates are scattered. The king, my lord, should know (this) too.
at the disposal of Ubru-Nabû, ...
Mannu-ki-Arbail has contracted and bought them for 20 minas of silver by the mina of the king.
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
Witness Bel-na'id, ditto.
1, 1, the chariot driver(s) of the crown prince, 27 horses in the city of Arbela.
The king, my lord, should know (this).
2 ... s of the chief ... ;
... the xth day;
... the servants of the god Aššur, king of the gods, and the goddess Mullissu, the queen, who live in Ešarra, the great temple, which is inside Ešarra, the exalted cult center, the residence of their great divinity, which is clad in gold (and) silver, and whose features are adorned with precious stones, and whose appurtenances are befitting their great divinity,
Nabû-šezibanni, the ... of the king, has ... ed the ... of the king, my lord, and is telling the people: "The king has given me the ... of the land of Akkad." He is telling the people: "The king has given me the ... of the land of Akkad." He is telling the people: "The king has given me the ... of the land of Akkad."
If Adad shouts on a day without clouds: there will be darkness in the land.
I am now writing to the king, my lord: let the king, my lord, send a royal bodyguard to the town of the king, my lord, and let them bring the people of the town of the king, my lord, with them. Let the king, my lord, give orders to the royal bodyguard to bring the people of the town of the king, my lord, with them.
The palace of Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria.
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
of the palace of ... of the Inner City ...
... I gave him the following order: "As soon as you have brought the horses and the mules, give them to the royal bodyguard NN, and let him bring them to me."
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
as ...
I took the city Elenzaš as a royal city and a fortress for that district, and (then) I changed its former name and
1,100 sheep of the king, belonging to the governess of the central city (harem), at the disposal of the brewers.
the rest of the ...
I have been living in Babylon for 10 years, and I have not heard a word from you concerning the house of your lords. Now, if you are alive, send a message to your servant!
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
... the scholars
The king of the lands, my lord, should know (this) and be circumspect; let him guard himself.
Witness Mutakkil-Marduk, scribe.
... I have sent three ... s
or the prefects, or the recruitment officers, or the team commanders, or the chariot drivers, or the cavalrymen,
to ...
the report of the commander-in-chief ...
x minas of silver belonging to Amurrî, at the disposal of Remanni-Adad.
Witness Šulmu-beli-lašme, from Calah.
and when he came,
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether, (should) Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, appoint the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the position which is written in this papyrus,
I have heard that they have taken 100 bales of straw from the town of Til-rahawa, and that they are transporting it to Dur-Šarruken.
... the town of Hal...
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether these men or their sons ...
I said: "Why ... ? If you ... , do not ... !"
... Arzâ, the palace superintendent ...
If the sun stands in the halo of the moon: in all lands (people) will speak the truth; the son will speak the truth with his father.
... Abi-ramu, reporter.
The gods of the king of the lands, my lord, have been very kind to me.
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
Witness Issar-na'id, royal bodyguard.
... I have written to you
shall place 10 minas of silver (and) one mina of gold in the lap of Ištar of Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owner. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
May my lord write me (about) the news of the son of Yakin.
... Witness Inurta-šarru-uṣur.
... to the guard
If the moon is surrounded by a halo, and the gate of the moon is open towards the sun:
Witness Nabû-šezib.
... us ...
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... 8, in the charge of Kanunayu, the 'coiffured woman.'
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, ditto.
... , 3rd day, eponym year of
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
The money is paid completely. That ... is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
the commander-in-chief ...
As to the ... concerning which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
... I have sent ... to them, saying: "... "
... of the bed ...
The city of the king of the land of Akkad.
... the god Nabû, the august heir, the one who controls the Igīgū and Anunnakū gods, the one who decrees the fates,
Should Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, appoint the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the position which is written in this papyrus?
I sent a eunuch of mine, the chief eunuch, to the land Hamath. He conquered the city Hamath, the city Arpad, the city Damascus, (and) the cities of the land Hamath (and) brought (them) to me. He captured alive the king of the land Hamath, (and) brought (him) to Nineveh, before me. I placed (the city) Hamath under the authority of a eunuch of mine, the governor of the city Arrapha. I received from him tribute and impost.
Zeru-ukin, son of Daddî,
The people of the lands Ḫatti, Aram, and Chaldea, all of them, the people of the land of the Qutu, the people of the land of the Šubaru, the people of the land of the Šumu, the people of the land of the Lullumu, the people of the land of the Papḫu, the people of the land of the Sūḫu, the people of the land of the Bīt-Adini, the people of the land of the Bīt-Amukāni, the people of the land
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šarru-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
... I will not give
... and the ... of the king, my lord, have been brought to me. I have given them ... , and they have gone to the Palace.
The son of Yakin has come to me, saying: "The king, my lord, has sent me to you; speak kindly with him!"
does not give ...
... horses trained to the yoke
I have come ...
5 horses trained to the yoke have come in from the commander-in-chief, incomplete:  Bel-eṭir has taken them, but they have not yet come in.
... in the district of ... , the governor of ... has exempted the fields of the ... eans from straw and corn taxes.
... four ... s
a ditto of quinces;
... The middle of the 'path' is effaced. The 'strength' is present. The 'well-being' is present. The 'path' on the left of the gall bladder is present. The 'base of the throne' is present...
... his ... to one
3 sons of Nabû-zeru-lešir;
Mars is the star of the Westland; it is bad for the Westland. The king of the Westland will die; a great king of the Westland will die; the king of the Westland will be humiliated; the king of the Westland will be overthrown; the king of the Westland will be defeated in battle.
we have not heard ...
9 (cuts of) meat of the house of the queen;
So that the construction of my palace might be carried out correctly and that my handiwork be completed, at that time, the god Aššur and the goddess Ištar, who love my priestly service (and) who selected me (lit. “who called my name”), revealed to me a source of trunks of cedar, which since distant days grew thick as they stood in seclusion in the Sirāra mountain range.
The 'station' is present. The 'paths' are 2, the lower one is white and speckled. The 'well-being' is present. The 'path' on the left of the gall bladder is present...
(As for) Aššur-dān (I), who had exercised kingship over Assyria after Aššur-uballiṭ (I), (and) had exercised kingship over the land of Akkad in opposition to Tiglath-pileser (I), (my) father, ... , (and) had exercised kingship over the land of Sumer and Akkad in opposition to me, ... I mustered my battle troops. I took the direct road against him. I marched to the city Ša-pī-Bēl,
1/2 mina of silver belonging to the merchant, at the disposal of Mannu-ki-Ninua.
... before ...
... my ...
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord, in charge of my messenger. Let the king, my lord, question him.
... before ...
The king, my lord, should send a royal bodyguard to the commander-in-chief, so he will do the work.
May the goddess Nanāya, supreme lady, look upon this work with pleasure and may a good word for me be set upon her lips!
... the treasurer
40 sheep;
I brought Dunānu (and) his brothers out of that city alive. I brought out his wife, his sons, his daughters, his (palace) women, male singers, (and) female singers and I counted (them) as booty. I brought out silver, gold, property, (and) the treasures of his palace and I counted (them) as booty. I brought out eunuchs, his attendants, engineers, (and) his food preparers and I counted (them) as booty. I brought out all of (his) artisans
let him ...
4 homers of wine, 5 seahs of oil, 1 seah of honey: chief treasurer.
adjoining the house of Ba... ,
In the month of Tebet (X), the city of Assur and the city of Dur-Šarruken will be in the charge of the governor of Calah. The king, my lord, should know (this).
... shekels, Aššur-aplu-uṣur, ...
Indabibi, who sat on the throne of the land Elam after Tammarītu, saw the might of my weapons that had previously prevailed over the land Elam and (as for) the Assyrians whom I had sent (v 15) to aid Nabû-bēl-šumāti, son of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), with whom they used to march about protecting his land like a friend and ally (and) whom Nabû-bēl-šumāti had
10 minas of silver, capital, belonging to Marduk-eriba, the scribe.
He shall pay in Iyyar (II). If he does not pay, the woman is acquired and taken.
Ditto by all the gods of Assyria and Babylonia!
Balṭaya,
To the king, my lord: your servant Nashir-Bel. Good health to the king, my lord!
... , 1 collar of ... ,
Nabû-šumu-iškun
6 straight garments, felted, the edging ... ;
I roared loudly like a storm (and) thundered like the god Adad against all of the troops of the wicked enemies. By the command of the god Aššur, the great lord, my lord, I blew like the onset of a severe storm against the enemy on (their) flanks and front lines. With the weapons of the god Aššur, my lord, and my fierce battle array, I turned them back and made them retreat. I shot the troops of the enemy with uṣṣu-arrows (and) mulmullu-arrows, and pier
... of the palace manager
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), capable shepherd, favorite of the great gods, guardian of truth who loves justice, renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the insubmissive, (and) the one who strikes enemies with lightning:
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Eltekeh (and) Tamnâ. I approached the city Ekron and I killed the governors (and) nobles who had committed crime(s) and hung their corpses on towers around the city;
1 1/3 mina ... of the queen mother;
Bel-duri,
The man who rages in his house is Bel. He is held fast in the prison.
(As for) the people of the land Karzibra, who had not bowed down to the kings, my ancestors, and who had not pulled their chariots (and) not submitted to their yoke, I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered forty-five of their fortified cities and small(er) settlements in their environs. I brought out of them people, horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty. Moreover, I destroyed, devastated, (and) turned into ru
The chariot which goes to the Akitu House and comes back has no driver. Without a driver it rocks about.
the woman Ahat-abiša, 3;
If a fog rolls in in Nisan (I): the land will go to ruin.
The crown prince supplies the food for the wedding night of Mullissu.
... the goddess Bēlet-ilī, the lady of creation, ...
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
... the goddess Ištar
to ...
the king, my lord, ...
To the 'farmer,' our lord: your servants Adad-šumu-uṣur and Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health to our lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless our lord!
before ...
From Ašaredu.
Witness Balasî.
The king, my lord, should know that I am not able to take care of the pack animals.
The king, my lord, should ask ... whether or not they have sold ... for silver. They are selling ...
the words of ...
I have written down the names of the sons of the palace maids and the sons of the magnates, and am herewith sending (this information) to the king, my lord.
... the De'eans ...
Witness Adad-aplu-iddina.
... I have been killed
... of the ... s
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
I have heard that they have written to the Palace: "The Itu'eans have come and taken the land of the Palace Herald from the hands of the Palace Herald. They have also taken the land of the Chief Cupbearer from his hands."
... Il-yada' ...
... Šarru-emuranni
May my lord quickly write me that he is in good health and happy!
... them
At that time, the great lord, the god Marduk, gave me as a gift a reign without equal and exalted my good reputation to the heights.
Total, x persons, servants of these gentlemen —
... to the king, my lord
he has ...
I besieged him and put him in dire straits. He fled to save his life and took to the mountain(s). I pursued him and defeated him. I conquered, plundered, destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire his cities. I captured alive the people of the land of the Arabs, as many as had risen up against me, (and) I counted (them) as booty.
... concerning ...
... my lord wrote to me
Performed in Arbela.
... The coils of the colon are 16 in number...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send me the news of the Urarṭian?" —
I had a foundation inscription written in my name and written in the name of Ashurbanipal, the senior son of the king, who (resides in) the House of Succession, my beloved son, and placed (it) in it. I had the might of the great gods, my lords, who go before me, written on it and I had (it) recited before them. I had the deeds that I had done, my pious work, written on it and I had (it) deposited in it for ever after.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-balliṭanni. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
As to what the king wrote to me: "The people of the land of the Arabs have come to me, saying: 'The king of Assyria has come to the land of the Arabs. The king of Assyria has made peace with us. He has concluded a treaty with us, saying: 'I will not harm the land of the Arabs. I will not take away the land of the Arabs. I will not do to the land of the Arabs what is not good. I will protect the land of the Arabs. I will not do to the land of the Arabs what
To the king, our lord: your servants Nabû-ra'im-nišešu (and) Salamanu. Good health to the king, our lord! May Bel and Nabû bless the king, our lord.
