I marched against them and fought with them at the Tigris River. In the thick of battle, I captured alive the king, my enemy.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
11 shekels of silver, of Ištar of Nineveh, belonging to Šepe-Issar, ...
5 minas and 6 shekels of silver, property of Ṭab-bet-Issar, at the disposal of Šepe-Aššur.
... fish ...
What ...
... they plundered ...
... Now then ...
Total, in the estate of 10 hectares ...
The king, my lord, should not be concerned about it. If they do not return to their places, there is no fault of mine.
Witness Baruqu, chariot driver.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
2 necklaces ... ;
Witness Urdu-Nabû, scribe.
... with the men, horses, and army at his disposal, will ... and plunder ... ?
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
The very best of health to the king, my lord!
x 1 litres, 1 litre for ... ;
If its horns are very dark: the flood will come.
Nergal-rešuwa,
4 horses from Mannea, in the house of the treasurer.
40 hectares of land in the town of Il-dulili, Sin-Issar, farmer, and his people.
Month Adar (XII), 21st day, eponym year of Bel-šarrani, governor of Kurbail.
... -šulmu, ... ;
Ahi-nagi, ... ;
... he committed a crime and ...
... -il, ... , Bel-lešir, 3 hectares of field, ...
Written according to its original and collated.
Ditto by Nabû, Nusku, Uraš and Nergal!
Inurta-ila'i has contracted and bought from Šer-idri for x minas of silver.
He places a libation bowl before the bed, sets it up, places a table before the bed, places a libation bowl before the bed, places a libation bowl in the left side of the bed, places a libation bowl in the right side of the bed, places two libation bowls on the bed, places one on the table, places two on the floor, and places one on the censer. He strews salt on the table, places two libation bowls of beer on the censer, and places one on the table.
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether NN or his sons or his grandsons, comes forward and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against NN, his son,
Witness Mannu-ki-Libbi-ali, scribe.
... the upper part was elevated. The lower part was elevated. The 'station' was present. The 'path' was curled. The 'well-being' was destroyed. The 'outside' ridge of the 'increment' was smashed. The 'increment' was present. The 'cap' of the 'increment' was smashed. The 'outside' ridge of the 'increment' was present. The 'path' was curled... The upper part was elevated. The lower part was elevated. The 'station' was present. The 'path' was
... you will ... upon your godhead
If Jupiter becomes steady in the morning: enemy kings will make peace.
... Ir-dalâ
x ... ,
10 shekels of silver, capital, belonging to Edu-šallim, at the disposal of Eriba-Adad.
Witness Sakî, porter.
... the people living in the city Uṣû ... I made (them) dwell in safety ... I made the city of the gods ... in a secure place ... I set up ... therein ... I imposed upon them ... the tribute of the gods ... I imposed ... upon the land ... I brought (them) into Nineveh, my capital city. I imposed upon them ... their annual dues.
Aššur has encouraged me ...
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
The women about whom the king, my lord, spoke, are in the storehouse. They are being held back, and they are very angry. If it is agreeable to the king, they should be brought into my presence.
... horse ...
(As for) Gugu, the king of the land Lullumuna, who had not bowed down to the yoke of the kings, my ancestors, and had not paid heed to the command(s) of (the god) Aššur (and) the goddess Babu’a, on this day, the day of this eclipse, he sent his (own) messenger to inquire about my (well-being).
Husâ, gardener, 3 sons, 3 women, 4 ... , 1 hectare of field, 1 house, x vineyards in the town of In-Issar, near the city of Hanati.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Witness Šarru-emuranni.
(whether) he will make common cause with his magnates, including Nabû-šumu-iškun, son of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), who fled from my battle array, ... , (and whether) they will plot insurrection and rebellion against him.
The money is paid completely.
May Aššur and Ištar bless the king, my lord!
These two are constantly plotting against your house. What are they saying? They are plotting against the servant of his lord, and I am hearing it.
(As for) Uallî, ... , ... , ... , the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, ... the great gods, my lords, who had taken action against him (and) had cast his fate (and) his seed in a net of a snake, ... (and) who had made the lordship of Erišum, his son, (5) greater than he (Uallî) had imagined, he (Uallî) sent a letter to Erišum, his son, in Nineveh, saying:
If a planet becomes visible in the month of Adar (XII): there will be flood and rain.
Bel-ahu-... , chariot owner;
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Bariki or Abail or their sons or grandsons or brothers or nephews or governor, or any relative of theirs, or a man or woman, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Remanni-Adad, his sons and grandsons,
A tablet of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, to Tammaritu, king of Elam. I am well; you can be glad.
Month Tebet (X), 25th day, eponym year of Dadi-nuri.
I shall set out ...
... and he ...
2 ... ,
The sky without clouds is Arbela.
... ra-hi-mumu,
Total, 4 seahs each.
If the moon and sun are in balance: reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the foundation of the king's throne will become stable.
and because of your kindness ...
The lord of the banquet, who ... , (and) the lord of the banquet, who ... , shall not be held responsible for the banquet.
Abda, shepherd ... , his wife ... , a total of x;
All this is the king's fault.
... servant of NN
If the sun rises in a cloudbank: three will raise weapons against each other.
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract, whether Aisi or his sons or grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Tarhundapî,
If Aššur and Šarur, which are in the sting of Scorpius, keep gaining radiance: the weapons of Akkad will be raised. Scorpius is the Great Lord, Sagittarius is the Lord of Rejoicing.
After he had made the attack and ... , he sent a letter of peace to Bel-iqiša, the son of Bunanu. He wrote: "... I will send barley and straw ... and letters ... "
... I completed. In the temple ...
x ... ,
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me,
Witness Nabû-...
Whoever in the future and at any time lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Arbayu or his brothers or nephews, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Ninuayu and his brothers,
all ...
60 hectares of field in Dur-Nanaya, Dadî, farmer, and his people.
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šarru-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! The land of the king, my lord, is well.
I gave orders: "Let ...
... the king, my lord ...
If on the 15th day the moon and sun are seen together: a strong enemy will raise his weapons against the land, and the enemy will tear down the city gates.
Witness Sa'imu.
I have been living in my city, but my enemies have plundered my father's house, taken flesh from me, and put me in irons.
saying: "I shall write to the king, my lord, about the bread of the temples, and the beer of the temples. The temples of the king, my lord, are well. The gods of the house of Nanaya are praying for the life of the king, my lord."
Shadow ...
Witness Aplaya, ...
in accordance with the wording of the document ...
Just as a female kid is torn out and put aside, so may you, your women, your sons and your daughters be torn out and put aside.
(Property) of Yabâ, queen of Tiglath-pileser (III), king of Assyria.
by their command
Esarhaddon, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, appointed by the god Enlil, priest of the god Aššur, ... governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, ... , favorite of the goddess Tašmētu, ... , ... who renovated the temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, great lady, beloved of the goddess Ištar of Arbela, ... , ... , king of the kings of the four quarters, ... , king of the great gods, ... who
Duʾūzu (IV), ... th day, eponym year of Aššur-duru-uṣur.
Libluṭ-nirka-ilu,
as ...
... what you ...
... is placed
... the deportees ...
Now, when the king says, "...
Three times I marched to the lands Nairi (and) conquered the extensive lands Nairi from the land Elam to the land Daiēnu, the land Ḫimua, the land Paʾirtu, and the land Ḫabḫu. I received tribute from the horses (and) mules of theirs.
... Aššur-šumu-ukin
The messenger of the king of Elam ... their letter ... they brought to me.
My heart was revived. I stood up and ... I was filled with joy. I raised my hands and prayed to the Enlil of the gods, the god Marduk.
... in the palace
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 7th day, eponym year of Bel-lu-dari, governor of Tillê.
The Tebilti River, a tempestuous flood (of water) which had flowed from distant days by the side of the palace and which had caused erosion in its foundation when its flood was in full spate (and) had shaken its base:
Witness Nabû-dur-beliya.
To Sin-kenu-uṣur:
May Belet-ili ... him before him.
... the singer intones,
I made statues of my royal majesty, which are made of silver, gold, bronze, (and) tin, in the likeness of the goddess Ningal, the great lady, the god Kittu, the exalted one, (and) the god Ninagal, the foremost one, to be their eternal image(s). I erected (them) in the courtyard(s) of my lordly palace, in front of the dais(es) of the great gods, for my life, the well-being of my city, the protection of my person,
of the people of my land ...
Now then I am sending you ... and ...
The king knows that our adversary does not speak with us, and our adversary is a criminal. He will tell lies in the presence of the king, and he will appoint a bodyguard over his servant's house. Let him do whatever he wishes, and let the king appoint a bodyguard over his servant's house.
... will be placed.
There is a hole in the right side of the lung. The top of the lung is trimmed.
From the beginning of my reign until my seventeenth regnal year, I defeated all together the Ituʾeans, the Ruʾuʾa, the Ḫamarānu, the Luḫu, the Nabatu, the Ḫindaru, the Ruʾuʾa, the Liʾtaʾu, the Muruʾa, the Marṣuʾa, the Muqusu, the Puruʾu, the Arameans, and all of the (other) insubmissive (tribes) living on the banks of the Tigris
Witness Tabalayu.
May the throne be overthrown and may the enemies of the king, my lord, seize me.
NN, porter;
The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
Concerning the ... about which Šešši-Aššur ... said, I have inspected the ... s.
Ashur-dan (III),
... Marduk, the governor
(As for) the people of Babylon, who had become frightened by the clamor of the (military) camp of the king of Akkad, the great lord, the exalted one, the one who commands the gods (and) the one who is chosen by the gods, they prayed to the gods of heaven and earth, the great gods, to have mercy on them. They made supplications to the gods who had been angry with them and beseeched their lordly majesties.
Witness Mannu-... , ...
Monument of Aššur-mudammiq, governor of the city Aššur of ... , chief eunuch of Aššur-rēša-iši (I), king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (II), king of Assyria, son of Erišum (I) (who was) also king of Assyria.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. The very best of  health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May Aššur, Bel, Nabû, Sin, Šamaš, Ninurta and Nergal guard the life of the king, my lord!
Afterwards, Uaia, his son, sat on his (own) throne. He did not honor the oath(s sworn) by the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), and Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Nusku, Nergal, (and) the great gods, my lords. He looked upon me with evil intent and plotted to level (me). He sent (his) messenger to Nineveh and he sent
The 'finger' which is placed before Ištar ...
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 9th day, eponym year of Labasi, chief of the granary (676 BC).
I shall tell you, nobody will listen to me.
The man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, whose name is called out by the goddess Ištar, who has sent his army to the aid of Pišanu, king of Egypt, who has grasped the feet of my lordship, and who has come to my presence — may Aššur and Ištar ordain that he should not fall into the hands of his enemy, and may they make his army strong and make him victorious over his enemy. May they make his feet as firm as a mountain before Aššur and Ištar.
The king, my lord, has received the magnates whom the king sent to the treasurer.
The deportees who went away ...
I am a dead dog. The king, my lord, should ... me ...
Seal of A... ,
I had a canopy of musukannu-wood, a durable wood, that is clad with pašallu-gold, (a metal) that is the product of Mount Amanus, installed over him (the king) as his eternal dwelling. I fastened bands of gold (and) silver on doors of cedar, cypress, juniper, and Indian wood and I installed (them) in its gates.
1, Nabû-šarru-uṣur, governor of Nineveh;
... he has ... ed the ... s
the women who were taken away ...
8 hectares, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto
The king's father was a very strong king. He turned his attention to the truth and he spoke the truth in his reign.
x minas of silver,
... to Damascus
Witness NN.
I wrote to Nēku-īriš, saying: “I will revive your country. I will conclude a treaty with you and give you the gold (and) silver that you deserve. I will put a golden sword in your hand and a golden dagger in your waist. I will write my name upon it and give it to you.”
The king, my lord, can be glad. The water of the canal is good.
... these
We have been waiting for the king, my lord, since long ago. We have been watching the moon; as soon as it is seen, we shall write to the king, my lord.
If the moon at its appearance wears a crown: the king will reach the highest rank; the land will dwell as if in pastures near the city.
Now then, Hutayu, the ... , who took the silver, gold, precious stones, and all the goods without number, has brought the rest of the ... s of the camp ... and is sitting on the border of the land of the Gambulu. I am herewith sending him to the king, my lord.
care of Ahabû, commander-of-50 ... , and Akkû.
... x hundred
Good health to the king, my lord!
The Pleiades are (equivalent to) Venus in the constellation of Orion.
... sent me
Witness Kubu-ila'i.
12 (items): silver) shields, (with) mountings of ivory (and) ebony, (and) inlays of ivory;
As to the news of the land Nagīte-pānu, Ašpa-bari has said to Kibi-Babi and Dusuku: "The king of the land Ellipi has given you the land of the city Gambulu. If you give the city back, he will give you another one. If you do not give it, he will kill you."
(As for) Ummanaldašu (Ḫumban-ḫaltaš III), he fled alone and took to the mountains. Nabû-bēl-šumāti, a man who had rebelled against him, cut him down with the sword. He brought his head (and) his hands before my messenger and gave (them) to me. He made a supplication to me, beseeching my lordly majesty, and he kissed the feet of Nabû-šû, the man who had sided with him, to show his loyalty to the
Witness Marduk-šarru-ibni, cohort commander.
1 house, 1 threshing floor ...
2 tureens of bouillon;
adjoining the street, adjoining the estate of 2 hectares of land,
Adad-bani-apli ...
3 copper cooking pots, of 1 seah each;
Month ... , 19th day, eponym year of Marduk-šarru-uṣur.
Bel-uballiṭ, NN, ... kinu, his son, 2 daughters of his, a total of 5 persons —
Ashur-nadin-apli.
Lions on the river bank.
With the support of my great godhead, which I had made great,
... I came
The base of the middle 'finger' of the lung is 'bound.'
The chief singer intones, “... , creator of everything.”
10 ... ;
What is it that he/she does?
Nabû-šumu-iddina ...
... me, the Aramean ...
The king's word to the commander-in-chief:
I shall bring in the harvests of the orchards and the fields.
I had a stele made, and (then) I erected (it) on the summit of Mount Ubur-Banitu, the abode of the goddess Ištar, for the gods of her (Ištar’s) entourage.
Witness Nabû'a.
Witness Šepe-... , ...
Witness NN. Witness Aha-tâ.
adjoining the street
x cubits long, adjoining the side road;
Na'id-ilu, royal bodyguard, has brought in the following report in Iyyar (II):
Adad-le'i, prefect;
in ...
Witness ... -Adad, ...
A tablet of Bel-aha-iddin to Iddin-ahi, his father. Good health to my father! May the sun of your day be bright!
Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Concerning the royal statues in Harran about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "The month is favorable, the day is favorable, they will enter it tomorrow" — ... for the sake of the harvest, the harvest is good. It will be favorable ...
This is of ...
... I will come ... and ... to you ...
Inurta-ila'i has contracted and bought it for x ... of silver.
... I have been sent ...
The one who is assiduous towards the shrines of Aššur, my lord, (and) the one who reveres the magnates and the sartinnu of the city, I — I have made the people of the city dwell in safety. I have made the people of the land dwell in safety. I have made the weapons of the city-garrison troops strong. I have made the magnates of the land strong. I have made the silver, gold, (and) property of the city-garrison troops strong. I have made the magnates of the palace strong. I have
Nabû-šumu-ereš, the šandabakku (governor of Nippur), who did not honor (my) treaty, (and) who did not respect (my) friendship,
... of Ninurta ...
100 hectares of land ...
... Bel-ša-ḫišti ... to the king's presence ... the chief eunuch ... Daniya and Bel-... said, and ...
Witness Il-qatar, royal bodyguard.
Copy of the letter which Naṣibi sent to Nabû-iqiša.
May they grant you happiness and physical well-being, and may they make you attain your desire! Say to the king, my lord:
I have not asked anybody about it, I have not asked a man or a woman.
... very
not a man, but a god ...
By the gods of the king, my lord,
Marduk and Zarpanitu, the gods,
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract, whether these men or any relative of theirs, or their cohort commander, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Nergal-kenu-ubbib,
... Kenî
11 ditto,
and his people, ... ,
News of the Urarṭian: the ... emissary of the Mannean ... has brought oxen and sheep ... , saying: "... in ... "
He shall pay in the month of Tebet (X).
I wrote to him thus: "The king of the Enlil of the gods, the pious prince, the one who is assiduous towards his cult centers, the one who is attentive to the will of Aššur, the one who strengthens his weapons, the one who is assiduous towards the kings, his ancestors, the one who loves the land of the Rušu, the one who is assiduous towards the cult centers, the one who is attentive to the will of your god, the one who is assiduous towards the cult centers, the one who is att
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your great divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
Aššur-belu-... came to me on the 5th day. He gave me the following order of the king, my lord: "... "
May the king, our lord, ...
Witness NN, son of Bel-eriba.
— Venus stands in Taurus.
a cup of quinces;
If he appoints him, as long as he holds this position,
I exercised authority over the entire land of Subartu, including Mount Nipur, as far as Mount Urumuš, (and) I exercised authority over the entire land of Zamua. I placed Šumarri, son of Ispabāra, (and) I placed the people of my land in order.
x, ... ,
... their ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
1 ... of Tik-kamuri,
A thigh, a shoulder, outer cuts;
When he was in the king's presence, he did not do the second (thing), he was afraid. He committed a crime, he fled and hid. The king
... the decision of the king, my lord,
Tiglath-pileser, the one who fashioned image(s) of the gods Anu and Adad, the one who made the enemy people submit to him, the one who (re)confirmed the regular offerings of Ešarra, the one who (re)confirmed the regular offerings of Ešarra, the one who (re)confirmed the regular offerings of Ešarra, the one who (re)confirmed the regular offerings of Ešarra, the one who (re)confirmed the regular offerings of Ešarra, the
to ...
Bari-il, the seer, who had fled from the house of his imprisonment, has now gone to the presence of the king, our lord. The king should ask him what he has to say.
Witness Sama-ka'in.
... the governor of Harran
cohort commanders;
a 2-seah jar of beer of bruised grain.
... as in the house of ...
... -le'i
I said: "... are coming ... "
From 30 sons of ...
... I in my reign
Uši-il,
... the king should ...
of the Inner City, for ... days.
Palace of Shalmaneser (V), great king, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), great king, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), great king, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria.
... the king, my lord
... Dur-Yakin ...
Concerning what you wrote ...
... I shall raise ...
x ditto, ditto, the front red, of the country;
If Jupiter reaches Spica and follows Regulus: there will be a fall of the land, variant: of Jupiter, variant: of Spica, variant: of the Pleiades.
you ...
... whom the king, my lord, had installed in the Inner City. The king of Assyria, my lord, had appointed my fathers and brothers to the watch of the kings of Assyria.
The king ... before ...
— On the 14th day the moon is seen together with the sun.
of ... archers
Kubaba-ila'i, the king, my lord, knows that he is a friend and an ally. He has been sent to Tikrak to give orders. This is the news. We shall write to the king, my lord, as soon as he returns.
including ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "You shall go and inspect the fort in Muṣaṣir. I shall send you much (amount of) equipment and supplies" —
450 silver objects belonging to the chief cupbearer, at the disposal of Imbî.
When the king goes down to the Palace, he ... s before Mullissu.
Sîn, Ningirsu, Rēšu: the king's (text: "god's") favoured one.
The king's son is doing the work. He has gone away and returned. He has made the bricks and laid them down.
Total 1,112. Month Iyyar (II), 29th day.
As to what the king, our lord, wrote to us: "...
... for the guard ...
2 'litres' of midru-bread;
NN ...
Now, concerning the horses trained to the yoke about which I spoke to my brother: "Let them come," he said to me:
... his people
... I shall revive
Seal of NN, owner of the women being sold.
Šamaš-eriba, servant of Hakkubu —
which I/he heard ...
Witness ... -Adad.
(As for) the gates (and) the door-jambs of the courtyard(s) of the ziggurrat, which are the entrance(s) to the land of the four quarters, I had (them) plated with silver (and) gold. I erected (them) as objects of wonder for the king, their lord. I named them “The Gates of the Courtyard of the Ziggurrat.”
... the reign of the king of Dilmun ... the reign of the king on the ...
In Kislīmu, the fifteenth day, eponym year of Šulmu-šarri, governor of the city Ḫalzi-abbar (695 B.C.).
Witness Nabû-da''in, ditto.
Witness Mannu-lu-šalim.
He said: "The doors of the temple of Sin, of the temple of Šamaš, and of Nikkal are to be fastened with silver." I have fastened the doors, but they are not finished. I shall fasten them on the 1st of Tishri (VII).
in ...
... tubes
Land of Bit-Hamban, Land of Sumurzu, Land of Bīt-Barrû, Land of Zualzaš, Land of Mamat,
Adar (XII), Sivan (III),
(Property) of Ša-Aššur-dubbu, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (II), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur. From the city Kār-Tukulti-Ninurta. Šerua.
(As for) Aššur, Aššur, (and) Aššur-nārārī, who had cast off the yoke of the god Enlil, who had abandoned the command of the gods Enlil and Adad, who had disregarded the oath of the gods Enlil and Adad, who had abandoned the command of the gods Anu and Antu, who had disregarded the oath of the gods Ea and Ištar, who had cast off the command of the gods Ea and Ištar, who had disreg
The king, my lord, will ...
The silver shall increase by two minas and three minas per mina, as the price of the seats of Aššur and Mullissu. When Akkullani has finished his work, he shall pay the silver in full.
a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
x vineyards in Til-Zanî, Manî, gardener, and his people.
exorcist ... ,
x ... of field, 1 house, a barnyard, in the town of ...
who do not keep this treaty,
... ;
2 'litres' of midru-bread; 2 'litres' of spiced bread.
... the king, my lord, said
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
Concerning the matter about which the king, my lord, wrote to me, let the king, my lord, send me a detailed report.
Belonging to the 24th day. Care of Šamaš-ibni.
On my eighth campaign, I marched against Dunānu, son of Bēl-iqīša, who had gone up to the land Gambulu. (viii 10') Because he had not bowed down to the yoke of the king of the land Elam, I set out in pursuit of him. I captured the city Šapī-Bēl, his fortified city, which is in the midst of the sea.
Concerning the captives about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me,
an estate of x hectares adjoining the road, adjoining Nabû-šezibanni, adjoining Nabû-... ,
as the king, my lord, ...
Muqalli(l)-kabti, a Melidean, ... ,
...
Witness Issar-šumu-iddina, scribe.
Ditto, ditto; may all the gods who are mentioned by name in this treaty tablet make you die of a (mere)yoke, and may they fill your grave with iron.
The king, my lord, should not say: "One of them has run away." I have mobilized the army and sent (word) to you.
Ištar, Ištar of the Fortress, Ber and the Son-of-the-Bird,
The heart of the sheep is normal. Check-up...
... Bel-šallim
Witness Gi... , ...
(As for) the one who alters the wording of this tablet, may he not have pity on him! May he remove his eyesight! May he not be able to see the light of day! May he not be able to cultivate the field! May he not be able to harvest the harvest!
... the bedroom ...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Abi-Riša or his sons or grandsons or brothers or nephews, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Mannu-ki-Arbail, his sons and grandsons, shall place 10 minas of refined silver and 15 minas of pure gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Witness Na'id-Adad.
I carried off the people and booty of the land Elam, which I had conquered by the command of the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Šarrat-Kidmuri, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, and Nergal. I added (them) to my royal contingent. I divided up the rest like sheep and goats among my governors, my nobles, and my entire camp.
... ;
The sheikh ... ; he is ... in this manner.
... of Nineveh ... he returned, and ...
Witness Remut-ili-baba.
The priest of Adad holds a torch made of wick ... in his hand.
... in the land of Akkad ...
... arrow
I have sent a detailed report to the king, my lord, concerning the offerings to the Inner City.
... king of the world, king of Assyria, ... , ... , beloved of the god Nabû, the shepherd of the gods Tašmetu and Tašmetu, ... governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, ... who ... brought about the defeat of the army of ... and made the kings of ... bow down at his feet, ... , ... , ... ,
... I asked him about ... , saying: "Send ... " He said: "Nabû-šumu-šallim ...
... his sons
Nabû-pir'u-šullim;
... to the king
Total, of Šulmu-ahhe, son of Uadi.
to ...
The chief ... and the delegate ... should come and do the work in their presence.
Urdu-Nabû has written a letter to Bel-eṭir and Šamaš-zeru-iqiša.
Nabû-eṭir, a man of Bīt-Ḫamban, ...
Witness Šar-Issar, ...
1 gold ring, 1 1/4 mina, 1 gold bracelet, 1 1/3 mina, 1 1/3 shekel, 3 1/3 shekels, 3 1/4 shekels, 3 1/5 shekels, 1 1/6 shekels, 1 1/� shekels, 1 1/� 1/2 shekels, 1 1/� 1/4 shekels, 1 1/� 1/5 shek
By the command of his exalted divinity, I have prayed to the Enlil of the gods, the god Marduk, and the goddess Zarpanitu, and they have answered me with a firm ‘yes.’
At that time, the temple of the god Sîn, which Shalmaneser (III), son of Ashurnasirpal (II), a king who preceded me, had built, had become old and I completely rebuilt it. I made its walls thicker than before. I raised its superstructure. I made its courtyard larger. I built anew an annex, a room, a terrace, and a courtyard.
owner of the ... being sold.
Witness NN, cohort commander.
I engraved on large limestone slabs (images of) the enemy settlements that I had conquered. I erected (them) at the city gates as a spectacle in order to show the people of my land the might of my army.
... outside ...
I have not heard anything specific about the king, my lord, since the beginning of the year. Now, for five or six times I have been sent to you, and now, ever since the king, my lord, sent me, I have been sent with the king, my lord's messengers. And my messengers have been sent with them. I have ... to the king, my lord, saying: "I will not ... against ... "
I conquered the mountains, rivers, (and) the city Duri-Šalmu, the palace of happiness, ...
Does your great divinity know it? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
1, Aplaya, palace herald;
... his ...
Land of the Review Palace, New Corps.
... ni;
The coils of the colon are 14 in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
a flagon of beer of bruised grain.
... the Pleiades
The woman of the palace manager;
... the palace of the evil one, the palace of the snake, which ... I completed and ... I made (it) shine like daylight. I ... my lordship, which the gods Aššur and Ninurta had granted to me, ... I offered sumptuous offerings to them. I made ... rejoice, and I made their mood jubilant.
... they shall glaze bricks
From Ašaredu, son of Damqaya, servant of the king.
... in his heart
Witness Adad-šumu-iškun, ...
Total, the temple of Nabû, his priest.
... in ...
The money is paid completely. That woman is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
x+34 horses,
... their words ...
Total, Aššur-matu-taqqin, village manager.
a total of 164 Kushite horses and 35 horses trained to the yoke, 6 mules,
... he has taken ...
... he came ... , a man who plots evil, a friend who ...
... he says: "Whoever in his hands ... did not send him to ... , ... "
... Urarṭian(s)
From Issar-šumu-ereš.
... you will lift ...
... is on the left. The breast-bone is thick...
... ditto;
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord! The fort and the exempts of the king, my lord, are well.
On my return march, I defeated all together the Tuʾunna, Riḫiḫu, Ubudu, Giri-Ruʾu, Malaḫu, Gurumu, Ubulu, Damunu, Gambulu, Ḫindaru, Ruʾuʾa, Puqudu, Ḫamrānu, Ḫagarānu, Nabatu, Liʾtaʾu, Aramu, (and) Ḫalamu. I captured them alive and brought them before me.
of the king ...
Witness Adad-naṣir, ...
Taboo of Aššur, my god, (and) Sîn, who dwells in Ḫarrān.
... the king, my lord
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
Witness Nabû-...
... there is
The king's word to NN: I am well; you can be glad.
3 bags of sesame;
Witness Isanayu.
... to Marduk-aplu-iddina
NN and his people, ... ,
I, a lowly creature, a dog, a creature of the assembly of the gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl and Nabû, the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, (and) the goddess Ištar of Arbela, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of my brothers, the one who reveres the gods Šamaš and Adad, by the command of the gods Šamaš and Adad, in the assembly of my brothers, the one who is assiduous towards their shrines, the one who
... he ...
The day after the 11th day we shall do the ritual ...
You ... the house of my father ... You made the woman Uṣâ, two sons of the woman Ikāša-kākki, a daughter of hers, a total of five persons, lie in bed with three blankets, a bedspread, a bed, a table, and a chair.
Ashur-dan (III),
It did not approach the halo of Cancer; it approached the halo of the moon.
Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it? Does your great divinity know it?
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
On my eighth campaign, I marched against Dunānu, son of Bēl-iqīša, who had gone up to the land Gambulu. When he saw the might of my army, he fled to the mountains. I pursued him and captured the city Šapī-Bēl, his fortified city, which is in the midst of the sea.
Witness NN, scribe.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
... enter ...
I captured the city Adummatu, the fortress of the Arabs, which Sennacherib, king of Assyria, the father who had engendered me, had conquered and plundered. I brought the rest of them to Nineveh, my capital city, and I presented (them) with my gifts. I made the gods Aššur, Samaš, Nabû, Ištar of Arbela, Ḫaya, Nanāya, Ruṣu, Abi-Ruri, Aššur-qurdi, and
If the moon is dark in Sivan (III): in the year after this the Adad will devastate.
If it is agreeable to the king, ...
Dayan-Inurta,
and he will give orders to ... to do whatever he wants.
Witness Riba-ahhe.
Month of Ḫilmu, eponymy of Mušēzib-Ninurta (792 B.C.).
From Aššur-nādin-aḫi, king of Assyria.
Disregard what happens after my stipulated term...
From Balasî.
... I built and ... I deposited my clay cone.
Now then I am sending you ... ; the people are not loyal ... ; the governor ...
The Urarṭian did not agree to this but said: "The son of Irtukkan ...
May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May they grant long days, everlasting years, and a long reign to the king, my lord!
Zar-Issar, son of Ahunu, ...
... his ... "The town ...
Palace of Ashurnasirpal (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also king of Assyria: booty of the city Rukibutu, of the house of Aṭalli.
... you will take ...
Total x, open chariotry, at the disposal of Kiṣir-... , whom the king gave.
Witness Šumma-Adad. Witness Ahu-kaška.
NN, son of Abi-haṣi, his brother, who had fled to Babylon, ... a crime, has returned to Nineveh.
I added 10 mules and 10 donkeys to the palace herd of the city Kalḫu. I settled 47,744 people, male and female, captives from the lands Yada', Ḫindānu, Paširu, Ḫatti, (and) Ḫatti, (and) I assigned them to the authority of the emissaries of the land Sūḫu.
Palace of Šamaš-šī-Adad, son of Išme-Dagan (II) ...
Witness Šepe-Issar, servant of the governor of Birtu.
... about whom you wrote, "When ... , he and Marduk-šumu-... went away and ... , and ... , and ... ," — when ... , they were taken away and ... ed.
Concerning them ...
I received gold (and) silver bracelets, (together with) their inlays, as their wrist-bands. I took away gold (and) silver daggers, their waist-belts, (and) their belts.
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, chariot driver.
... I have sent ...
The coils of the colon are 16 in number.
x ... -garments,
I received tribute from Ianzû, the king of the land Naʾiri, in the city Ḫubuškia, the city Šumma-Hamban, six (of) the cities Birati, ... , which is in the district of Ursa, together with their settlements, ... , eight (of) the cities Birati, together with the cities in their environs, which are in the district of the land Tuāya, ...
... fish ...
The lower part is elevated. The left of the gall bladder is attached.
a cup of quinces;
10 talents 15 minas ...
— Jupiter stood there one month over its period.
x+1 ... -garments, the front red, ... ;
The land of Akkad is well; the mood of the troops and the king is good.
NN, his son of 3 spans,
3 ... ;
I gave (him) a golden necklace, saying: "Do the work of the god and the work of the temple of the goddess Uṣur-amāssu quickly!" He made a replica of the necklace of the goddess Nanāya and the temple of the goddess Bēlet-ilī, and he made (it) shine like daylight.
The 'strength' is absent. The 'yoke' is present...
I entered the palace, which is in Babylon, (and) I inspected its treasures. I saw gold, silver, gold (and) silver utensils, precious stones, all kinds of possessions (and) property without number, a substantial treasure, (together with) his wife, his palace women, courtiers, attendants, (and) his attendants, and I counted (them) as booty. I had the palace expertly built and I deposited (my) monumental inscription.
The king, my lord, should know (this). The Šubrian ...
Let them return the sheep to their places.
And don't be negligent about your work!
The kundibšu have arrived. I have sent them to the king, my lord. They are in good health and in good spirits.
I am doing the work.
(As for) Sangû-Marduk, the lord of the house of Eṭir-napšati, who had abandoned the house of the king, his lord, and had gone to the house of his enemy, he saw the might of the gods Aššur and Adad, the gods, my lords, and fear fell upon him. He took the king of the land Elam into captivity and placed the king of the god Nabû in irons. He took him to Elam in fetters.
From the city Uaia, I marched to the district of Iaunu, the king of the land Naʾiri. Iaunu, the king of the land Naʾiri, set out on a campaign against me and pitched his camp before the city Ḫubuškia, his royal city. I received reinforcements and (then) I set out and marched against him. I captured the city Ḫubuškia, his royal city. I received horses, oxen, and sheep and goats in the city Ḫubuš
Witness Hu-habšu.
My battle troops, who are in the land Mangisu, which is inside (the territory of) the city Sumandir ...
... to the king
... he seized and
I have now sent my messenger to them, saying: "Let them give their captives to me." If they are in my country, I shall seize them and bring them to me. And if they have crossed the river, I shall cross the river and seize them.
The money is paid completely. That field is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
1 basket of (mixed) fruit.
Zizî,
... he has cut
an estate of 2 hectares of land adjoining Mannu-ki-Arbail and the king's road;
From the 20th day of the month ...
... and I deposited my monumental inscriptions. I anointed with oil the monumental inscriptions of Šamaš and I made (them) stand (there) forever. I ... ed the king of Assyria, who (re)constructed the temple of the god Ninurta.
... sent ...
... the territory of the region
... and he/they ... ed the people ... and ... ed the rest of ...
If Venus disappears in Ab (V) from the 1st to the 30th day: there will be rains; the harvest of the land will prosper.
Of the days ...
... , eunuch of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, the one who is loyal to the treaty, the one who has spoken truthfully with the king, his lord, and has returned his heart to his lord, stood in my presence and beseeched my lordly majesty.
x rings, for his servants;
To the king, my lord: your servant Gabbu-ana-Aššur.
Land of Kush,
Let them give me ... ,
Witness ... ayu.
... in the presence of the king of Babylon
1 seah 1 'litre' of regular offering loaves;
... Ninurta will seize upon Enlil and cause him to die.
Adda-hutni, farmer, 2 sons of Idrî ... , 1 woman,
adjoining the house of Bahianu, adjoining the house of Daniati-il,
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Month Iyyar (II), 5th day, eponym year of Gambulu.
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
The baths of Ea:
Witness Nabû-zeru-iqiša.
To the king, my lord: your servant Mannu-ki-Ninua. Good health to the king, my lord! The land of the king, my lord, is well.
Ever since I have been small, I have been a man of the city, a man of the street, a man of the market, a man of the assembly, a man of the council, a man of the court, a man of the palace, a man of the palace herald, a man of the palace heraldess, a man of the palace, a man of the palace, a man of the palace, a man of the palace, a man of the palace, a man of the palace, a man of the palace, a man of the palace, a man of the palace, a man of the palace
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, or changed or altered the proceedings...
... the former ...
Let them ... their ...
20 ditto, his purification priest;
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: good for Akkad, bad for Elam.
... which Aššur, my lord, who had encouraged me, had allowed me to ... and had entrusted to Aššur, my lord, and had made (me) stand in victory with the support of Aššur, my lord, and the god Nergal. For my life, the life of my family, the well-being of my city, the security of my palace, the prosperity of my harvest, the abundance of my grain, the abundance of my fodder, the abundance of my cattle, the abundance of my sheep, the abundance of my goats, the abundance of
May Ištar, the king, my lord, not know ... May she ... the eyes of the king, my lord, ... the ... of ...
The remainder of the bricks of the main building of Kar-Tukulti-Ninurta.
We are the ones who are assiduous towards his shrines, who are constantly attentive to his cult centers, who are assiduous towards his sanctuaries, who are constantly attentive to his cult centers, who are assiduous towards his sanctuaries, who are constantly attentive to his cult centers, who are assiduous towards his sanctuaries, who are constantly attentive to his cult centers, who are assiduous towards his sanctuaries, who are constantly attentive to his sanctuaries, who are assiduous towards his sanctuaries, who are constantly
Concerning the gold about which I wrote to the king, my lord, saying: "If there is a report about ... , let the king, my lord, send it to his servant" — why did the king, my lord, send me ... ?
... I have written to the king ...
We have set aside the men and brought them into the king my lord's presence. They are waiting for the beams. They will cut the beams and bring them in.
From Ninurta-kudurrī-uṣur, the king.
I marched to the city Memphis, which is in the land Ḫatti, a great country, a place of abundance, the city Sangat, which is in the mountains and the land Suḫu, (and) I conquered (and) plundered (it). I returned safely to my land.
... half a 'litre' each;
... much ...
I was appointed by the gods Aššur, Mullissu, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela, the great gods, my lords, who had encouraged me and given me confidence, to rebuild that temple. I made the gods who had abandoned it enter inside it and I made (them) sit on (their) eternal dais(es). I made splendid offerings before them and presented (them) with my gifts.
... from
care of Aššur-killanni.
He is in my presence ...
Dutanu ...
The king, my lord, has done a favour for the walls of the father of Nikkal. He has provided for the house of the stela of Nikkal.
Witness Issar-taṣi.
Nabû-eṭiranni,
Moreover, I made the palace of the queen, my mistress, the lady of the gods, (and) the lady of the palace beautiful and splendid. I had a portico, a replica of a Hittite palace, (and) a ziggurrat, a replica of a ziggurrat in Babylon, (vi 10) (and) I skillfully made (them) with baked bricks from a (ritually) pure kiln.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
... I/he caused the people to go up to Assyria ...
Palace of Tiglath-pileser (III), king of the universe, king of Assyria: (brick) belonging to the terrace (and) the moat of the garden of Nineveh.
100 (hectares) of land, 100 (hectares) of orchard, 100 (hectares) of cultivated land, 100 (hectares) of irrigated land, 100 (hectares) of land under cultivation, 100 (hectares) of land under cultivation in cultivated groves, 100 (hectares) of land under cultivation in cultivated groves, 100 (hectares) of land under cultivation in cultivated gro
The middle of the 'station' is effaced.
... ditto;
... Man(nu)-ki-Adad
... Ahu-duri
... The 'path' is curled...
The commander of the mule expresses, the commander of the female mule express, and the commander of the mule express have not yet returned. Now, I have given 30 houses, but they have not yet return there. The men of Nabû-ṣalli, the prefect, and the commander-in-chief are staying in the town of Hidusu. Let them bring them into the city of Argi. Let them give them fields and orchards, and let them return there.
Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, has contracted and bought him from Issar-duri and Lu-šakin for 4 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
1 urnutu-garment, ditto, the front ditto, ... , the front ditto, ditto, ... ;
(Property) of Ḫimme, son of Bēl-apla-iddina.
2 sheep, roasted,
Witness ... abu-uṣur. Witness Abi-ramu, city overseer.
Month Elul (VI), 13th day.
Now, the messengers of the son of Zeru-ukin, who went to the king, my lord, and set their minds on Kišesim,
And perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "What are you doing?" — I am (now) waiting for the king, my lord, and shall do (my work) as soon as the king, my lord, says so.
I cut down the cedar beams (and) I piled (them) up on the ground like a heap of rubble. I leveled two hundred and eighty-eight cubits (and) twenty-one cubits deep into the earth and I reached the water table. I dug out a terrace of seven hundred and one hundred and thirty-six cubits (and) I reached the water table of the middle earth. I dug out a terrace of four hundred and forty-three cubits (and) I reached the water table of the middle earth. I dug out a terrace of three
I have performed the offerings of the fifth day before Aššur and the gods of the king, my lord. All the offerings of the fifth day have been performed.
I seized and ... to ... , saying: "Why did you take this ... ? You will die! You will be put in irons and brought before the king. Three minas of silver will be your fine, and I shall release you and you shall go."
In the month of Tammuz (IV), when the tribute of Ezida ... was brought, they gave out one tureen of ... for 10 shekels of silver, one tureen of oil for 12 shekels of silver, and three shekels of silver for the ... s.
... not yet
I carried off silver and gold, property of the land of Sumer and Akkad, the land of Karduniaš (Babylonia), (and) Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, together with the kings of the land Elam, (and) I deposited (it) in the land Elam. I conquered the land of Sumer and Akkad and (then) I set Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, my favorite brother, as king of the land Elam. I imposed upon him tribute and tax. I imposed upon him the payment
The money is paid completely. Those fields, houses, threshing floors, orchards, and well are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Concerning the merchants about whom my lord said: "They have not sent their money" — I have sent (word) and they have brought 14 minas of silver.
... 1/2 'litre';
I have opened their eyes.
Witness NN, ... of Hatarikka. Witness NN.
Bel-ahhe, chariot owner, 2 cavalrymen, and 3 outriders.
... the ... who ...
... to them ...
(As for) Ṣiḫi-milki, his daughter, he brought her up like a male child, (viii 10') he did not let her grow up, he did not allow her to enjoy her childhood, (and) he did not give her a marriage (or) a family. He brought her up like a male child, he did not let her grow up, he did not allow her to enjoy her childhood, (and) he did not give her a marriage (or) a family.
From Ašaredu the older.
... the king, our lord, ...
Their orchards ... ; Giri-Ba'al ... , 3 emissaries of the city ... have come in today.
... the sun ...
Witness NN.
... the deputy vizier
At that time, the Great Wall of the city Aššur and the wall of the city Šubria, which the kings, my ancestors, had previously built, had become dilapidated and I completely rebuilt them from top to bottom. I deposited my monumental inscriptions. I deposited the monumental inscriptions of the kings, my ancestors, (and) my monumental inscriptions. I deposited my monumental inscriptions.
x, ... ,
adjoining the field of Šulmu-beli, son of NN, ...
... ditto;
An estate of 4 decares of ... , a pond, a fish pond,
Tiglath-pileser, king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, chosen of the god Aššur, vice-regent of the god Aššur, beloved of the gods Anu and Enlil, whom the god Aššur and the great gods made great, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of the gods, who reveres the gods of heaven and earth, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of the gods of heaven and earth, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of the gods of heaven
To the king, my lord: your servant Bel-eriba. Good health to the king, my lord!
Let ... be ...
... , the Arraphean; Ea-šarru, Belet-ili, Babu, Enlil, Adad, Šala, Sin, Nikkal, the Image of the King, Šakin, Šarrat-samme, Tašmetu, Adad-šamê, the Bull, the Birds, the Lions, the Clouds, the Apsû, Tašmetu, the Lions, the Storms, the Cedar, the Axe, the Birds, the Bulls, the Birds, the Lions, the Storms
To Esarhaddon, king of Assyria: your servant NN. Good health to my lord!
Witness Šulmu-šarri.
1 bag of sesame; 6 ditto of (mixed) kernels.
These 5 months ...
Witness Tuqunu-ereš. Witness Addî, merchant.
I cut with iron picks a canal straight through a mountain, from the Ḫusur River to the plain of the city Šibaniba. I made (it) 340 cubits long (and) 188 cubits wide. I made (it) 700 cubits long (and) 166 cubits wide. I made (it) 288 cubits long (and) 100 cubits wide. I made (it) 140 cubits long (and) 43 cubits wide. I made (it)
Witness Banî, deputy of the chief physician.
Eponym year of Arbailayu, chief treasurer.
Witness Dugul-pan-Apladad-nadin-ahi.
... and
... has been ...
Witness Mannu-ki-Aššur, ditto of the crown prince.
have carried away ...
... or by force
20 minas, NN, merchant ...
The Lady of Three and the Tent of Mannea.
... without
161 cavalrymen, 130 charioteers, 52 lamentation priests, in all 343.
a 2-seah jar of Assyrian budê-confection;
... x, x, x — the palace herald.
... my command ... in the midst of battle
... my ... and my citizen(s)
... x litres of beer
Total, 2 (of) Raṣappa.
... to the king
... my land
I have sent ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... Dur-Šamaš-rēša-uṣur.
... houses in Calah, the palace
... from Elam
x ... of wine for the days ...
1 large gold dagger, its mounting of 26 minas 1/3 gold, in weight;
After the letter of the king came into my presence, I wrote to the king, but he did not send an answer to the letter of his servant.
x litres — Ahu-lurši;
Moreover, breccia, as much as is needed (for making) burzigallu-bowls, (a stone) that had never been seen before, was discovered at Kapridargilâ.
This is the rest of the matter which was written on the letter.
Witness Nanî, ditto of Nabû.
and I deposited my monumental inscriptions. May a later prince restore my inscribed name to its place. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
or a ... , or a bow-man, or a weaver,
Total, the chariot-horse-trainer.
... which ...
... will he take ... ?
These are the water (and) the roads which Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, appointed to Baal, his servant, for the cities Akkudu and Dukrû in the district of Mount Pinnar, and in all the cities of Assyria which are on the shore of the Upper Sea. And in the city Gullulu of Chaldea, the cities in the mountains which are in Assyria,
my towns are ...
Witness Kunaya, eunuch of ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Issar-šumu-ereš. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I asked the people of the land Bīt-Barrû about the fate of the land Tīl-Ašurri, which had rebelled against the people of the land Muḫrānu and the land Pitānu and had plundered their country.
adjoining the field of Nabû-šakin-šulmi, adjoining the field of Abi-ṭab, adjoining the road to Issete, adjoining the field of Abi-ṭab,
1 hectare 1 decare, road of Qumbate, adjoining Qumaya, the road of Qumbate, and the field of Ahi-qamu;
Land of the Bit-Ammonites.
2 seahs, the 21st day;
of the palace herald.
... he shall place ... there.
The servants of Bel-ahhe-eriba who went to the king, my lord, saying: "Our brothers are in Na... ; Ninurta-ša-... , the royal bodyguard, wrote to us ... these ... "
I captured the city Bīt-Zabdīya, a (royal) city of Uruk, the cult center of the Enlil of the gods, the city Dēr, together with the city Kār-Nabû, which is in the neighborhood of the Euphrates River. I captured eight fortified cities of the land Bīt-Yakīn, together with 100 small(er) settlements in their environs.
After I had departed from Zabban, I went up to Babylon and entered the presence of Nabû-ahhe-bulliṭ, the delegate of Esagil. He had made the rest of the tribute of the temples of Babylon enter Babylon. He said: "I shall give you this."
Mušallim-Ninurta,
Witness Šamaš-ahu-iddina, physician.
a cup of small onions; a ditto of quinces;
Now, whatever Bel-ušezib does, let the king do as he deems best.
From this day on, whatever you say or do,
... appointed me
Sa'arri,
Month Iyyar (II), 25th day, eponym year of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, of Marqasa.
As to what you wrote to me: "The messenger of Metunu the Gutian has come to me, and I have sent 14 men of the Gutian to Urarṭu. They are staying with me. I am now praying to Aššur, Šamaš, Bel and Nabû, my gods, not to let them die in the waterless desert.
1 bowl of soup, for the sick man of the palace;
4 grates of silver;
From Bel-šuma-iškun, lamentation-priest.
Now then ... to the king, together with ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-reṣuwa. Good health to the king, my lord!
Sin-šidu, ... , his son, his wife, his daughter, ... , his wife, Uza... , his wife, Uṣi... , a total of 10 persons —
at the disposal of ...
He said: "He is a man from Byblos. He has said: 'We will not go ... '"
11 houses ...
the governor ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "I am keeping watch over you" — I have become afraid.
... I myself was the one who made their good deeds and their work more splendid than before.
an estate of 2 hectares of field, a wadi, Ahi-qamu;
What else? Let ... quickly ...
Witness Issar-aplu-iddina, son of NN.
... Pa'ê, the delegate of the Arabs, said: "...
Danqu,
... I have settled ... in the city Usiya. I have also settled the towns. The king has provided for them.
The money is paid completely. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
May Aššur, Illil and Ninurta, ... , ... , make your name good, may they make your weapons strong and your hands capable, and may they make the king, my lord, attain his desire.
I have sent ...
Witness NN, boatman of Šišik.
Seal of Salamanu, owner of the ... being sold.
1 house; 1 threshing floor; a total of 2 farmers; 60 hectares of arable land, 40 hectares under cultivation therein; 2 houses; 1 vegetable garden.
Qisaya, his wife, 2 daughters of his, a total of 5;
... he made to disappear
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mulliltu bless the king, my lord!
You offer fatty tissue before Belet-ili, make a flour/incense offering, pour oil, honey, beer and wine, and sing, “... , creator of everything, you are exalted, you are supreme, you are lofty, you are exalted, you are supreme, you are lofty, you are exalted, you are lofty, you are exalted, you are lofty, you are exalted, you are lofty, you are exalted, you are lofty, you are exalted, you are lofty, you are ex
I am well, my lord is well, there is no king ... , and I have not sent ... to the king or to my lord.
Ashur-rēša-iši, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-dān (II), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-bēl-dān (II) (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur: builder of the temple of the god Anu.
... he will ...
... to ...
you revive this land ...
... The coils of the colon are 14 in number...
Illil-naṣir, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Kēl-nāṣir, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-nāṣir (I), vice-regent of the god Aššur:
I set Šarru-lū-dāri, son of Rūkibtu, their former king, over the people of the city Ashkelon and imposed upon him the payment of tribute (and) gifts (in recognition) of my overlordship so that he (now) pulls my yoke.
Disregard that the subject of this query, Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, is going to the city of Enlil, and (that) the journey will be difficult for him...
At that time, the ziggurrat of the god Aššur, my lord, which is in the area of the city Ubāsi, had become old and I completely demolished it. I built (it) anew and deposited my monumental inscriptions.
in the house of your pride,
You offer fatty tissue before Šamaš, make a flour/incense offering, pour oil, honey, beer and wine, and sing, “... ”
... the vizier
Total 2: Tabnî, scribe of the chief eunuch, son of the king.
The land of the Saparda, the Saparda who are in the marshes, are the Saparda of Bel, Bel and Bel. They go down to the underworld.
Witness NN, chief ...
From ... hiya.
If ... becomes stable: ... will ... five times in the Pleiades ... the Babylonians ...
... his servant wrote to me ...
... , NN and his people,
Adad-nārārī, king of the universe.
“The city is safe”: the word of the city god.
Witness Daulî, ditto.
The gall bladder is flattened. There is a 'weapon'-mark over the 'increment.'
x minas of silver, Ra... , merchant.
Witness Šamaš-šallim, chariot driver.
If the moon is surrounded by a black halo: the flood will come.
On the advice of the city Ḫuḫiḫu, I captured the city Kalḫu, the city of Aššur, and settled the people of the lands conquered by me there. I placed a eunuch of mine over it.
... Aššur
Those days in ... many ... I did not release ...
... let them speak
If the Old Man star comes close to the top of the moon and stands there: the king will exercise complete dominion.
and the city which is said in the treaty, he will not abandon ...
Moreover, Ṣidqâ, the king of the city Ashkelon who had not bowed down to my yoke, I forcibly removed the gods of his father’s house, himself, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his brothers, (and) the seed of his father’s house and took him to Assyria.
And concerning the Lady of Akkad about whom I wrote to the king, my lord: "She has been taken to the Akitu House" —
May a later prince restore it. May he restore my inscribed name to its place. (Then) Aššur will listen to his prayers.
17 sheep, owners of the meal;
May they grant ... to the king, my lord! May they consolidate the foundations of the royal throne of the king, my lord!
We are now keeping watch. We shall write to the king, our lord, as soon as we have seen (anything).
... in ...
... in the town of Arzabia ... in the environs of Kumme ... , saying: "If the treasurer commands, I shall go and bring (him)."
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Aqarâ or his sons or grandsons or brothers or nephews or labour dues collector,
Concerning the substitute king, saying: "He should go to the ... " —
... I shall give ... , let them ... the halo.
The temple of the god Aššur, which Shalmaneser (III), son of Adad-nārārī (II), king of Assyria, had previously built, had become dilapidated and I completely rebuilt it. I deposited my clay cone.
Witness Silim-šilim, scribe.
From Nergal-eṭir.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to his servant: "Who is your ... ? Let your ... be very, very strong!" —
The king's word to the palace herald, the delegates of Babylon, and the Babylonians: I am well; Assyria is well; you can be glad.
If a planet comes close to Regulus, the crown prince who is named by the father of the father of the throne, and seizes the throne: the crown prince will exercise the throne for many years, and the throne will become stable. The great gods will make the temples of the land prosper; the king will become happy.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
not ...
Witness Bel-...
Witness Ki-bî, haruspex. Witness Milu-il, ditto.
(As for) Mitinti, the Ashdodite, he rebelled against the treaty (sworn) by the great gods and ... he sided with me. (viii 10') Rahiê, a man of Bīt-Ḫamban, ... he sat on his throne and ... he was doing his work. I captured 500 ... and brought them into his city, the city Ḫamban. I captured the city Ḫamban, a city of ... , (and) I carried off Idi-Biʾi,
... I shall bring in
This is the fault of ...
and the territory of his dominion
(As for) Necho, Šarru-lū-dāri, (and) Pa-qruru, kings who had been raised in Egypt, (viii 10') (and) had plotted evil (deeds) against the treaty of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, my lords, and had forgotten the kindness that I had done for them, they plotted to wage war and strife. They spoke malicious words about me, (viii 15') (and) they were constantly plotting to kill me. They sent Tah
If the moon is not seen in intercalary Adar (XII) at the appearance of its horns: attack of a strong enemy, and the land will experience misery.
Nabû-ušabši sent a report of the Palace to Kudurru. He sent two sons of his with 30 men to Babylon. The king should know it. The men who ... with him ...
1 prayer bowl ditto;
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šar-ahhešu, of the mausoleum of Nabû-da''in. Good health to the king, my lord! The king, my lord, can be glad indeed. I am now keeping watch with the king, my lord.
Witness NN, chief of the master builders.
Šepe-šepe, ... ;
Nergal-eresh,
This year, seed corn ... ; ... water ...
at the disposal of Ereš-Issar,
10 ditto, hallam;
(As for) Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II), the king of the land Elam who had seen the destruction of his (Ḫumban-nikaš’s) (own) destruction and had fled to me, he (Ḫumban-nikaš’s) (own) fear overwhelmed him and he passed away. I cut down (his) corpse with the sword.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me:
... you shall fear ...
2 hectares of land in the town of Aisi-ṭab, Adda-ta'idri, farmer, and his people.
There is a 'weapon'-mark in the top of the left surface of the 'finger' and it faces the top of the 'finger.'
... I had them brought into Gambulu (and) ... I asked (them) about the ... s in the land Ulliba.
Witness Šulmu-ahhe, ditto.
Month Elul (VI), 25th day, 22nd year of Sennacherib, king of the world.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
... I fastened bands of bronze ... on ... and ... I installed (them) on the door bolts.
... will plunder
Witness Ṭab-šar-Nabû, scribe, keeper of the document.
... of the mouth ...
... he ...
1 piece of jasper and 1 piece of obsidian, each of which weighs 10 minas;
Minu' ...
If a fog rolls in: the harvest of sesame will diminish.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments...
If you should sin against Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, his brothers, ... , and if you should commit a crime against him, you shall not be spared. You shall not be exempted, you shall not be exempted, you shall not be saved, you shall not be spared. You shall not be exempted, you shall not be saved, you shall not be spared.
Witness Nergal-ahu-uṣur, commander-of-50 of ...
Because ...
... the wall ...
3,000 stalks of vine;
The guard ...
... the king, my lord
... of the king ...
1 hectare — Zabutanu,
He abandoned his brothers and fled to me. The gods abandoned him and he became a wanderer. He roamed about like a wild bull, a dangerous animal. He was constantly on the alert, (and) his heart was constantly troubled. He was constantly worried about my well-being. He was constantly concerned about my happiness. His heart was constantly troubled. He was constantly worried about my kingship.
I shall finish off the rest of the tribute of the lands.
... -ibni
... I surrounded, captured, plundered, destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire.
10 ditto, ... ;
... will be placed in the heart of the ram.
He said: "I will not go to the Palace. I will stay in the fort in the king's presence."
— This night, the moon was surrounded by a halo; Cancer and Gemini stood in it.
Let them place ...
... I became afraid ...
5 sheep, 5 bowls (of wine): the queen.
... three years, the gods ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... ,
... which to Marduk-šakin-šumi
The king, my lord, should give orders to his servant to seize all the people. I am a poor man; I have no means of my own. May they not seize upon me!
The people of Memphis have not agreed to come to my work, saying: "We are men of the king."
... who sat on the throne of Azâ and brought about the defeat of ... , ... against him, and ... to Urarṭu.
And the lady of Elam is coming to us. Let the king give us orders: "Let us go ... , and let us set our eyes upon ... , and let us not listen to anything else."
... the Birati of the Urarṭian who attacked him, captured his men and brought them to Birati.
The city Malakitu is a fortress. When the day is overcast, it rains, the rain falls on ... , the towns and the garrisons are flooded. It has rained in Der.
Palace of Aššur-nādin-apli, king ...
Palace of Aššur-bēl-kala, king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, son of Tiglath-pileser (II), king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (II) (who was) also king of the universe (and) strong king (and) king of Assyria.
adjoining the field of NN,
I received ... from Kibaba of Harhar ... horses and mules.
I have sent him ...
Witness Ninuaya, ...
I have heard that ...
Total 19 gods of the house of the gods.
Witness Abunu.
a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
For his life and the well-being of his city he built the temple of the goddess Ištar of Arbela.
NN, royal bodyguard;
Concerning the envoys of Bit-Kari
From Nabû-šuma-iškun.
Total, from the estate of Ibâ.
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, or has altered or changed the proceedings...
Witness Mullissu-metu-uballiṭ.
On my return march, I defeated all together the Tuʾumuna, Riḫiḫu, Yadaqqu, Ubudu, Gibrê, Malaḫu, Gurumu, Ubulu, Damunu, Gambulu, Ḫindaru, Ruʾuʾa, Puqudu, Biqudu, Ḫamrānu, Ḫagarānu, Nabatu, Liʾtaʾu, Aramu, (and) Ḫalabu, insubmissive Arameans
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-šumu-ukin. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May the gods ... ... happiness which ... give to ... in order to ... good health to the king, my lord!
... Aššur-šumu-iddina
May Šamaš, the exalted lord, strike you down with his fierce weapons.
Shalmaneser, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil and vice-regent of Aššur: he built the Tabira Gate, together with the city walls of my city Aššur, for the sake of ensuring the well-being of my city A
... sent me
If the Pleiades enter the moon and follow it closely, and one horn meets the other: the king of Akkad will extend the life, and the land will become happy.
and the rest ...
Witness Adallal, ...
Šamšī-Adad, strong king, king of the universe, unrivalled king, shepherd of all rulers, the one who provides for the cult centers, the one who renovates the shrines, the one who provides for the sanctuaries, the one who makes abundant the offerings of Ešarra, the one who provides for the cult centers, the one who renovates the temples, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines, the one who provides for the sanctuaries, the one who is assiduous towards the temples, the one who is
5 minas of silver, 5 togas, 5 tunics, 1 pot of salt, 1 pot of honey, 100 fish, all tribute of the queen;
You shall not sin against this treaty, nor make rebellion against the oath (sworn by the name of) Aššur, nor make common cause with anyone who does so, nor make an insurrection against Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, against Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, nor against any of the sons of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, nor against any of the sons of Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, nor against any of the grandsons of Assurbanipal, the
The eponym year of Sagab (651), including the eponym year of Nabû-šar-ahhešu, who for six years (now) have been bringing the audience gift(s) to the palace.
1 talent in the heavy sort ... for 2 ...
in all 6 witnesses from Bit-Eriba-ila'i.
Total, 30 minas of silver, ... , instead of the silver ...
I have brought a letter from the governor of Media with me, saying: "Your messenger should go to the Palace."
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-šar-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord!
a ... and ...
... he will die.
... until I gave orders to my messenger.
... they have come
6 ... ,
The people of Kumme ...
The money is paid completely. That field is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The whole temple has rejoiced. All the gods of the king are well.
The king ...
If the king, my lord, commands, let them bring them down and do as the king, my lord, commands.
... the son of the king
... Bel-sama' ...
... the lower part is elevated. The 'outside' rides upon the 'cap'...
The 'cavity' of the left lung is split...
He shall pay the silver on the 30th of Tishri (VII). If he does not pay, he shall pay 4 shekels of silver per month.
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-alik-pani. Good health to the king, my lord!
(As for) the base of the throne, which is the seat of my goddess Gula, it had become old and was in need of repair. I removed its dilapidated section(s) by the command of my goddess Gula and (then) I rebuilt (it). I deposited my monumental inscriptions.
2 cuts of shoulders, of 1 ox, the stomach, the liver,
Month Iyyar (II), 15th day, eponym year of Kanunayu of Dur-Šarruken.
... of Nabû-ahhe-... , chief ...
Sennacherib, ... , ... the creation of ... , ... the lord of ...
The breast-bone is thick.
Šakiru, servant of Ahabû —
... from that day
... I marched to the land Lulumu ... the city Madqirâ, the city Andari, ... the land Adasi, which is at the foot of Mount Nipur, ... the river Zababa, a place of crossing, ... the land Lulumu and the land Adasi ... I set up my lordly statue on them for future days.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
3 haunches, 6 ribs,
Witness Šarru-lu-dari.
In a pitched battle, I fought with them and defeated them. I captured 500 ... , 280 (of them) I killed, (and) 100 (of them) I carried off alive. I burnt the palace, the residence of the great lord, down to the foundation pit. I added (the area) of the palace to 914 large square meters and 480 large square meters. I built (and) completed (it) for his lordly pleasure. I named it Eḫulḫul, “The palace of abundance.”
in the town ...
shall place 10 minas of silver and one mina of gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Total, 2 horses, 5 chariots, 50 archers, 100 men ... , 5 horses, ... , Nabû-ahu-iddina, ...
with the land of ...
Witness NN, scribe of the crown prince.
Ili-pada, son of Ili-pada, son of Sin-šamê, son of Šamši-šamê, son of Adad-šamê, son of Adad-nārārī, son of Ninurta-uṣur, son of Ninurta-tabni, son of Nanû,
If ... in the path of the Enlil stars and ... : ... Akkad will experience joy in heart; the king of Akkad will extend the life.
... ni, son of NN,
1 ... , 12 oxen, gold;
The moon is surrounded by a halo in the morning.
(As for) the one who destroys an inscribed object bearing my name and an inscribed object bearing the name of my father, grandfather, or great-grandfather, or (who) does not place (it) with an inscribed object bearing his name, may the great gods of heaven and netherworld overthrow his sovereignty (and) destroy his name (and) his seed from the land.
... to the šandabakku
shall place x minas of silver and one mina of gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owner.
shall give 2 minas of silver.
Why ... ?
of the fort ...
17 hectares, ditto, ditto, of the chief judge;
Witness Qarhâ, ditto.
I captured the people of the city Akkuddu, undisciplined Gutians. I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire the city Uslimus, their fortified city. I brought many captives of the god Aššur into the territory of Assyria and added (them) to my numerous troops, which the god Aššur had granted to me.
livers, kidneys, hearts.
You sing, “... ,” before Belet-ili.
With my royal bodyguard and my battle troops, I myself set out and took the direct road.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ninurta-nirka-da''in. May the land of your lordship be well!
I brought out Padî, their king, from the city Jerusalem and placed (him) on the lordly throne over them, then I imposed upon him payment (in recognition) of my overlordship.
Kiakki, the king of the city Šinuḫtu, who had plotted evil (deeds) against Mitâ, the king of the land Musku, and had sent his messenger to inquire about his (Mitâ’s) health, saw the ... of his (Mitâ’s) ... and the people of his city, his chariots, ... his daughters, ... and ... his ...
The god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises.
... he returned ...
... Kenî,
... camp ...
Aššur-rēša-iši, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, whom the gods Anu, Enlil, and the great gods had chosen for shepherding Assyria (and) strengthening its cult centers, who knows the gods of heaven and earth, who is assiduous towards the shrines of the goddess Ištar, (and) who reveres the great gods, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of the god Aššur, the strong one, the one who
... ;
The women shall go to Nineveh and ...
... you ...
Witness Erṣiṣi.
... he did not ...
Witness Bahî.
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, then I brought him (Ispabāra) to naught and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣiṣṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, fortified cities, together with the small(er) settlements in their environs (and) the district of the land Bīt-Barrû in its entirety, and I added (this area) to the
After the king has entered the palace, the Lady of the Land ... sits in her seat. The oxen and sheep of the house of Dagan are placed before the king in the courtyard of the palace. Aššur is seated on his seat.
Saturn stands in the halo of the moon.
If a planet is red: plenty for the people.
If Nergal at its appearance carries radiance like the stars of the sky, and the Pleiades approach the land of Akkad: attack of the enemy, variant: attack of the enemy of Akkad; there will be plenty and abundance in the steppe, variant: plenty and abundance for Akkad.
... red, rear part;
May Venus and Mercury return the captives.
The vertebrae are recessed. The 'cavity' of the lung is ...
... his evil, the gods Ea, Šamaš, Asalluḫi, Adad, Abi-il, Banitu, the river, the spring, the reed marsh, the whole region, the king, my lord, is very, very well.
or ...
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
The king, my lord, who provides for this garden and the ziggurrat, who provides for Aššur and the weapons of Mullissu, who sits on the dais, performs a sheep offering, provides for the stele,
Witness ... la...
The land of Dagunu ... the king, my lord, wrote
without knowing ...
Because of the evil of the wicked, the evil of the wicked which is done in Esagil, the evil of the stars of heaven, in the assembly of the gods, they (the gods) killed them (the wicked) like birds. Month after month, the gods Sîn and Šamaš killed them at their appearance. The gods, who had encouraged me, strengthened my throne, and made my reign secure.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nammir. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord.
In the month Adar (XII), the day of my lordly birth, I built a palace anew, a replica of the former ziggurrat, for my royal residence.
Esarhaddon, fear not, my shepherd! I will make the gods of Assyria rise up and go at your side!
and ...
This is the interpretation of the 5th day of the king ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Balasî. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Witness Nabû-eriba, deputy.
Witness Aya-adad, chariot fighter.
4 ... ,
The front ditto, Hanî;
Month ... , xth day, eponym year of Issi-Adad-aninu.
I shall set out tomorrow and go to the fort. I shall set out and go to the fort tomorrow, too.
Seal of Adad-ahu-iddina, owner of the people being sold.
News of the house of Dala-iqiša: he is in Nippur. The watch is strong.
I have sent ...
saying, "...
A tablet of Urzana to the palace herald. Good health to you!
or ... will plunder it for his own use, or ... will cause others to plunder it, or ... will cause others to plunder it, or ... will take it away,
... Mannu-ki-...
(As for) the city Tīda, ... I laid waste its settlements, which ... I burnt, destroyed, (and) plundered. I did not leave a single one alive. I razed (and) destroyed that city, together with all of the settlements in its environs and my camp.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "The prelate of ... should come ... , and let them speak with him" — he came, but he did not come ... He sent ... , and when he heard that he had come, he went ...
Remanni-Adad, chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, has contracted and bought him for 17 1/2 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish from Mannu-ki-Ninua and Sin-šumu-...
I strengthened the land Bīt-Amukāni and I brought their people to Assyria. I captured Mukīn-zeri, their king, in the city Sapia, their city.
... of my lord ...
The king, my lord, has sent a servant of his and sent him to the house of his lordship. And he has sent back a letter.
I have brought out the barley from the towns of ... li, Menaga, and the forts of Aššur-belu-taqqin. I have stored it there. I have also sent men there.
Isana
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract, and erases his name (and) writes his (own) name, or destroys the house, may the god Ḫumban (and) the goddess Ištar look upon him angrily and order his destruction!
... the king, my lord
If a star flares up and ... the path of the sun ...
If Venus becomes visible in Sivan (III): the enemy.
Total, 7, of Adad-...
Total, 6 women.
... I have seen ... of the king, my lord.
As to what the king ... from the country of ...
... you will not guard me ...
Witness Ubru-... , mayor of Que.
to ...
... came ...
The officiant pours a cup of water and a cup of beer into the river. He throws in a fish, and sings, “Ištar, Ištar, Ištar, Ištar, Ištar, Ištar, Ištar, Ištar, Ištar, Ištar, Ištar, Ištar, Ištar, Ištar, Ištar, Ištar, Ištar, Ištar, Ištar, Ištar, Ištar, Ištar, Ištar, Ištar, Išt
I cut down the poplar tree that was its trunk, together with its entire branch system and root. I filled the area with ruins (and) buried the ruins of Assyria therein.
... fish
The gall bladder is flattened and ...
NN and his people, Tuqunu-ereš and his people, NN and his people,
Who is this man? This is the ... about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me. He is in his truth.
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial audience gift from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
x jars of ... wine;
Good health to my brother! May Aššur and Ešarra bless my brother!
... his associates
The commandant of Babylon wrote to the king, my lord: "The citizens of Babylon are living in Baniṣu. They have been sent to me by the commandants of Borsippa and Cutha, and they have attacked the citizens of Babylon. They have plundered the citizens of Babylon, and have taken their possessions. When my commandant and my men captured them, they killed my messengers and took them to Baniṣu."
... not ...
... ;
... upon the Urarṭian, who had fled to me from the land Urarṭu, Ursâ (Rusâ), king of the Urarṭian, sent a letter to me, but I did not heed his letter. He sent his letter a second time, and I did not heed his letter again. He sent a third letter, and I did not heed his letter again. He sent a fourth letter, and I did not heed his letter again. He sent a fifth letter, and I did not heed his letter again. He sent a sixth letter, and I did not he
... the king, my lord, should ask (about it). If I had not appealed to the king, my lord, and if the king, my lord, had not appointed me, I would have been a dead dog. Now, let me appoint me under the authority of my lord, and let me do the work ...
If the Scales (= Sirius) are very bright: there will be plenty and wealth in the land.
who ... his staff
I captured the forts that had revolted against Baʾalu, the king of Tyre. I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire the settlements on the shore of the sea and the highlands. I brought captives from them to Assyria.
Witness Usi, cohort commander.
... my army. You are ...
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "After you have finished the work ... , ... the work ... " —
10 ditto, hallam;
Witness Šepe-Aššur, ...
Now then they are on their way to the king, my lord.
Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, who is now intent on ... , and seeks your great divinity,
2 talents, the weaver of multicoloured trim.
... ditto;
(As for) Baʾalu, the king of the land Tyre who did not honor my royal command(s), I captured (and) plundered the cities Ḫalṣu, (and) Ḫanṣu. I set up garrisons against him and (then) I returned safely to my camp.
Witness Uqur-ahhe.
... a messenger came to the city ... , saying: "I have received my share of the field of the Elamites, as far as the field of Ḫalî ... The field has been taken away from me. I have written to the king, my lord, and he will hear my case. The king, my lord, will listen to me and his heart will be appeased. I have heard that the king, my lord, will not listen to the case of Libluṭ-Bel. The king, my lord, should know this.
I marched to the city Madaktu, his royal city. In the month Tebet (X), the coldest month, (vii 10) snow fell and (thereby) the road became very difficult. The snow became so deep that my chariot could not advance. I turned back and returned safely to Assyria.
As to the ... about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let them come and show the bull colossus" —
... the lung ...
Witness Ubur-rapki.
(As for) the one who alters the work of the seven (men), who removes the name of the creator, who does not fear the command of the god Enlil, (and) who does not respect the treaty (sworn) by the god Aššur, may the god Enlil, the lord of lords, glare at him angrily and determine a bad fate for him! May he not live long! May he not be happy! May he not enjoy the pleasures of the god Enlil, the lord of lords!
I shall destroy the rest of them.
... Urarṭian(s) ...
After I had made the treaty, I ... my brother, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I myself, I
... he has finished the work
The gods Aššur, Ṣiru, Ši-bīti-bēl-kala, Ea, and Belet-ili, the great gods, the Igigi, the Anunnaki, the Igigi, and the Anunnaki, the gods of heaven and earth, who had waited for me since distant days, had mercy on me and made me attain my desire. They looked upon me with pleasure and (then) they made my name (and) my seed greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises. They made my
... the king of Elam ...
Does your great divinity know it? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Disregard the (formulation) of the prayer for today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-belu-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! The city of Der and the fort are well.
He ...
Total, x+1.
The deportees who were taken away ...
... will go to the place of the ordeal. He will sit in the house of his choice, and he will be placed over the ordeal bowl.
... inspected
I restored its weakened (portions). I repaired its dilapidated section(s). I made (it) larger than before. I (re)confirmed its privileged status that the great gods had granted to me. I returned its captives to Nineveh.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Witness Nabû-abu-uṣur, ...
Witness Silim-ili.
Samaria, ...
... in the beginning ...
NN, donkey-driver;
x, ... of the town of Kummu, ... ;
... the 'hand' of god ...
... their words ...
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, unrivalled king, shepherd chosen by the great gods, favorite of the gods Anu and Adad, the one who is assiduous towards their shrines, the one who provides for the cult centers, the one who is attentive to their command(s), the one who is assiduous towards their rites, the one who provides abundantly for their sanctuaries, (and) the one who makes their cult centers shine like daylight:
... I shall do as I deem best.
(As for) the rest of the Arabs who had fled from my weapons, the god Erra struck them down like a storm. He scattered their flesh and their children like sheep and goats and filled the plain with their corpses. He made the gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), and Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela, the great gods, my lords, look upon them with fury and determine a bad fate for them.
Ditto by Sin and Šamaš! Ditto by Adad and Marduk!
He said: "We have not yet arrived, we are on our way." He took 30 sheaves and set them up before the censer of ... , saying: "If the 20th day or the ... th day of Elul (VI) comes, we shall set them up."
If a planet becomes visible in ... : rain and flood will last long.
240 bows,
20 minas of black wool;
... he has not spoken with us. As the king's servant,
Witness ... biaš, scribe.
1 seah 1 'litre' of regular offering loaves;
And let the king send a royal eunuch to you, so he can appoint him over the fort.
I put the chariots and horses that had been abandoned in the thick of battle (and) the remnants of their teams in good order (and) I reorganized them. I put two double-hour(s) of travel behind them and (then) I set out (and) marched.
4 ... ;
... of the city Ḫamban ... (and) the city Yakīn ... will kill, plunder, loot, take (for themselves), and ...
The king, my lord, knows that the house of Marduk-šakin-šumi
The charge of the Lady of Reš is doing very, very well; the king, my lord, can be glad indeed.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have seen fear and terror at night, or (that) the oracle query has become jumbled and impaired in my mouth...
a ditto of small onions;
... his fathers ...
and as to what my lord said, the gods have become angry and are plotting to destroy you.
To the king, my lord: your servant Na'id-ilu. Good health to the king, my lord!
We kept watch on the 29th day; we did not see the moon. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
... cavalry ...
5 ditto — Il-hari,
I myself prayed to the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Nergal, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela, the gods who support me, (and) they immediately heeded my prayers and came to my aid.
... against the king's word ... I myself ... my brothers ... and ...
If on the 14th day the moon and sun are seen together: reliable speech; the land will become happy; the gods will remember Akkad favorably.
Twice, ten thousand troops of the land of Mušku, insubmissive to the command, were defeated in the thick of battle. They were scattered like sheep, and (then) they fled alone like lions.
... his ... s to the banquet
Now then ...
they have given ...
... the men ...
Witness Busi-ilani, ditto.
Ever since the people of Hame ... went away and came into my presence, I have been going to Borsippa ...
Who has taken away the property of Babylonia and covered it all over?
When I came to the king, my lord, I was in the presence of Ma'umaya. Now, let the king, my lord, come to Ma'umaya and ask him.
1 goose, 1 duck, 10 turtledoves.
To the king, my lord: your servant Akkullanu. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
From Nabû-šuma-iškun.
Palace of Sin-šarru-iškun.
Those ... are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your great divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire his cities, and turned (them) into ruins.
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, builder of the temple of the god Aššur, (re)constructed Esagil and Babylon, renovated the statues of the great gods, king of Egypt, king of Muṣku, king of the four quarters (of the world), son of Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Ass
From the throne of Bel-Harran, as far as the fort of Adad-remanni, from ... as far as Dur-Tukulti-Ninurta, x leagues x stretches x rods, from the throne of Bel-Harran.
Witness Bel-...
I will cut off ...
After Aššur-etel-iddin, king of Assyria, has gone away, Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, will sit on the royal throne. He will exercise the kingship and lordship over you. You shall not sin against him, nor make rebellion against him, nor plot evil against him, nor speak evil things about him, nor make an insurrection against him, nor plot evil against him, nor make an insurrection against him, nor seize him, nor kill him, nor make an insurrection against him, nor make rebellion against
The god Aššur, the great lord, ... the gods Anu, the great gods, and the goddess Ištar, the lady of the lands, the great lord, ... the god Ea, the creator of everything, ... the goddess Tašmētu, the ... of heaven and earth, ... the god Šamaš, the exalted lord, ... the goddess Šarrat-nipha, the ... of my royal majesty, ... I built.
(As for) the stone that bears his name, I had it brought inside and, as soon as I had finished (the work), I had a stele made and inscribed on it all the mighty victories that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, and I erected (it) for all time. I made a sacrifice, (and) presented (it) to (the god) Aššur, my lord.
From Nabû'a of Assur.
... Nergal-... , son of Ana-Nabû-taklak
Witness ... -ili, eunuch.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Where are the rest of the troops?" My major-domo is delayed, but the rest of the troops are coming.
Nušku-duri, ... , 2 women, a total of 3;
Nabû-ahu-uṣur, man of Bīt-Ḫadarri;
Total, the men from ...
The 'quality' is present. The 'cavity' of the 'crucible' of the lung is smashed and lies in the presence of Šarru-emuranni and Kalu-šumu-ukin. They keep watch over it.
There is a 'foot'-mark in the left side of the lung. The breast-bone is trimmed...
... , x, x, x — ...
Witness Zarutî, physician.
Witness Ahu-illika, servant of the chief eunuch.
the son ...
The king should ask the 'head man' about the saplings. The 'head man' should bring the saplings.
Sukkaya,
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
The messenger of the king of Babylon came to his presence in Nisan (I). The king of Babylon sent his messenger to him, and he killed an ox in his presence. He made an appeal to the king, my lord, saying: "Let me see a seal of the king of Babylon, and I will give you one talent of gold and one talent of silver in the hands of my messenger."
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, ... , the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur, (re)constructed the temple of the Assyrian Ištar, the shrine of the divine Sebetti, the shrine of the divine Kidmû, the shrine of the divine Lamma-Raši, the shrine of the divine Bīt-Kidmuri, and the shrine of the great gods:
stomachs, livers, kidneys, hearts.
The king, my lord, can be glad indeed.
In the charge of Aššur-ahhe-eriba.
The Itu'eans who were appointed to the fort have returned this favour to the bodyguard. The bodyguard has told the king, my lord, about it.
... my messenger
Concerning Nabû-qati-ṣabat and Šamaš-... about whom the king, our lord, wrote to us: "Send (word) that they be arrested and brought to me!" —
To the king of the universe, my lord: your servant NN. May DNN bless the king, my lord.
This from before Aššur.
Now, let the king ask Arbayu about the news of his servant.
I made a golden chariot, a replica of the god Marduk, (and) a golden image of the lord of lords, with mountings of red gold, (and) I dedicated (it) to the god Marduk, king of the universe, lord of heaven and earth, my lord. I placed (it) in the temple of the god Marduk, the king of the universe, lord of heaven and earth, for the sake of ensuring my good health (and) overthrowing my enemies.
He shall have the usufruct of the field for 3 years and 3 fallow years.
7,000 barley rations by the seah of 6 'litres' at my disposal.
From Haza-il, in all 2 servants of the lady of the household of the crown prince, owner of the man being sold.
I have sent ... to the king, my lord.
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered 88 fortified cities of Chaldea, together with 820 small(er) settlements in their environs.
10 shoots (of sesame);
The money is paid completely. That field and house are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
From Ašaredu.
Ahiqar and his servants, the Lady of Akkad, have blessed the king, my lord. The king, my lord, knows that the gods of the king, my lord, have given me confidence. The king, my lord, has sent me a bodyguard. When the king, my lord, gave me confidence, the gods of the king, my lord, have given me confidence.
... the king made a sacrifice and returned the eating-bowl. He offered fat oxen, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat goats, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep, fat sheep
10, (of) the land of the Tablet, ... ;
20, Assyrian, commander-in-chief;
He shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall give his men back to their owners.
He performs the sheep offerings, treats the gods,
Ubru-... , NN, Ahu-... , Si... , NN,
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who loves the god Aššur and the goddess Mullissu, the one who reveres him, the one who is assiduous towards his royal cult, the one who is attentive to his command, the one who is assiduous towards his father’s throne, the one who is circumspect towards his land, the one who is reverent towards the great gods, son of Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned the image of (the
1, the village manager, at the disposal of Zarutî, cohort commander.
Witness Nabû-ahhe-iddin, baker.
chariot-horse-trainer;
Now then the envoy of the Šubrian is on his way to the king, my lord. What are the king my lord's orders?
May Ninurta, the foremost heir, who makes the enemy people submissive, break his heart in the thick of battle and make his name (and) his seed disappear from the land. May the gods of the city Kār-Adad, the exalted one, make him go out to Nabû, his lord, and make him wander about in the underworld like a ghost.
the forts ...
x,000 saplings, Arbume;
Witness Daddî.
2 jerboas;
Month Iyyar (II), 26th day, eponym year of Gabbaru.
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the city ... tu, a royal city of the land Elam.
... you will not reach your goal ...
the governor of Calah ...
Qarranu,
Ma... , servant of Bel-Harran-isse'a and Mannu-ki-... —
Witness Bubutu.
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of Assyria, unrivalled king of the world, shepherd chosen by the great gods, favorite of the gods Anu and Adad, the one who is assiduous towards their shrines, the one who is attentive to their will, the one who reveres their great divinity, the one who is constantly attentive to their command, the one who is assiduous towards their shrines, the one who is pious towards their sanctuaries, the one who is constantly attentive to their will, the one who
... in the gate of the goddess Zarpanītu, which is opposite the gate of the goddess Ištar, I laid.
The bread of the House of Aššur, of all the temples, is the chief baker of the House of Aššur.
1 of šubû-stone for 1.
Witness Mušezib-Aššur, ...
... they have become empty
... this ...
Witness Sa'ilayu, ditto.
Palace of Sargon (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, favorite of the great gods:
I have heard the news of my lord, and I am very glad.
... and ...
... the king who subdued my insubordinate (and) rebellious forces, the one who brought about the defeat of the strong land and the land of the Arabs, the one who put the insubordinate (and) rebellious forces under the yoke of my chariotry, the one who gathered together the scattered forces of the lands,
... Šumma-Adad, chariot fighter
With the support of Aššur, my lord, I advanced from the city Tušḫa (and) crossed the Tigris. I received reinforcements (and) the chariots of the fortified city Dariâ, a city of the Chaldeans. I captured the city Pitaru, a fortified city of the city Dēr, (and) burnt it. I captured the city Marṣi, a fortified city of the city Dēr, (and) burnt it. I captured the city Marṣi, a fortified city of the city Dē
... this to Nisan (I)
... the chariot-driver of the palace ...
The criminals have been caught. The magnates and the king's eunuchs have been arrested. They have been brought before the king's presence. They are still alive. They have been placed on your throne, and they are waiting for the king's decision.
... for the preservation of his life, my lord, to Nergal and Laṣ, to ... , to the shepherd of Ekur, to the man of Cutha, to the king,
... their ...
... the men and the army in their midst
If you should sin against Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, or against his brothers, his uncles, his nephews, his cousins, his family, his ancestors, his offspring, his wife, his brothers, his sons, his daughters, his prefects, his counsellors, his attendants, his labour dues, his corvée dues, his labour dues, his corvée dues, his apprentices, his apprentices, his labour dues
Concerning what the king, my lord, ...
... Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, the one who is being sought out,
1 gold ring, 15 1/3 shekels, 1 gold bracelet, 1 1/3 shekel, Ahu-duri, son of NN.
... I ...
Disregard that I, a haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments...
Witness Akkû.
Šerî, farmer, 6 persons; Milki-nuri, farmer, x persons; ... -Issar, farmer, 2 persons; NN, ... ,
Month Adar (XII), 12th day.
... he killed ...
... good sense ...
Whatever he says to my brother, send him to me!
... as many as there are, should be deported and brought into the palace. Who ... ? Who ... ? Let them ask him ...
in this city ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šarru-emuranni. Good health to the king, my lord!
From Nergal-eṭir.
... until now
4 hectares in exchange for 32 shekels.
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
I am sending Bel-šabši to the king, my lord.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Balaṭu-ereš or his sons or grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Mušallim-Issar,
Month Iyyar (II), 28th day, eponym year of Aššur-naṣir.
3 ... -garments, the front red, ... ;
Witness Inurta-isse'a.
30 turtledoves.
... the rear part
... he revives the seed of the land ... he provides for the gods Sîn and Ningal ...
... the town ...
... the xth day;
I shall not forget the kindness that you did to me.
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract, whether Babilayu or his sons or grandsons or his brothers or nephews or his prefect or any relative of his, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against the woman of Borsippa,
This month, let them bring the king out and make him perform the nāṭu-ritual. Let them perform the sheep offerings.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the 4th day of this month, ... , to the 11th day of Sivan (III),
Bel-naṣir sent his son to the house of Ibnaya, son of Nur-Sin, but he did not marry.
This is its interpretation.
... very
Šumma-ilani has contracted and bought him for x minas of silver.
Cloaks ...
NN, bodyguard of the queen mother;
... as follows:
which with ...
The greatness of the great lord, the god Marduk, ... , the exalted one among the gods, the great lord, ...
Witness Nabû-balassu-ka''in, baker.
Let the king send a scribe to Balṭu, and let him ... the ... which he/they are holding back.
Witness Kablu-Issar, rab sikkāti.
Total, of the son of Remanni-Nabû, the sheikh.
The coils of the colon are 14 in number.
... not ...
... or a ...
Naṣiru, the Elamite, who had abandoned his post and had gone down to the underworld, ... and had returned alive, ... , ... of Assyria, ... , ... of Babylonia, ...
Month Tishri (VII), 8th day, eponym year of Bel-Harran-šadû'a.
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Bel and Nabû bless the king, my lord!
Babylon,
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the ... th day of this month, the month ... of this year, to the 23rd day of the month Marchesvan (VIII) of this year, for ... days and nights, my stipulated term,
... my royal throne ...
Isî, his wife, Banî, his son of 5 spans, Dâ'anu, his son of x spans, Ru'â, his daughter, a total of 5;
NN, farmer, and his people.
Marduk-šumu-uṣur, Naṣiru, Tabnî,
The son of Nikkal-iddin has ... ed to the king of Elam and to Humban. He says: "... the king of Assyria and the camp ...
... their eunuchs ...
Abu-ila'i,
... before
I exercised authority over the extensive land of Karduniaš (Babylonia) ... I imposed upon the chieftains of Chaldea tribute (and) payment(s).
Now then, I am sending you to Dur-Šarruken. You shall ... the bull colossus upon you ... as you ...
... Nabû-na'id, king of Babylon, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Nabû-balassu-iqbi, ...
I will destroy ...
Concerning the news of Belšunu, the Bit-Dakkuri about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me, I sent a messenger to him, but he refused to come. When I heard (this), I seized him and brought him into my presence.
Concerning the troops about which the king, my lord, wrote to his servant: "For how many days have they been marching?"
If the moon becomes visible in Tebet (X) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour Subartu; a foreigner will rule the Westland.
... with Urad-...
Concerning the offerings, the oxen and the sheep,
When the god had commanded me, I mustered my forces and set out on the road. I crossed the Euphrates and Tigris, (and) the sea, which were in flood. I captured the city Gaza, the great city which had rebelled against me, and I counted (its) inhabitants as booty.
... you will fear ...
... days
2 talents of linen fibre;
He has paid 4 minas of silver, the debts of Šamaš-ila'i, to Sailu and Sailu. He has redeemed Šamaš-ila'i.
If a fog rolls in Shebat (XI): eclipse of the Kassites.
Seal of Šamaš-ku... ,
The day he committed his crime, he was filled with dropsy. His eyes were swollen ...
a writing-board ...
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract, whether Nabû-eriba or the governor or the deputy, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation, shall pay 12 minas of silver.
Marduk-... ,
Written according to its original and collated.
Concerning what the king wrote to us: "You shall provide shelter for the runaways" — let them provide shelter for the runaways, and let them also provide shelter for the runaways who are guilty of crimes.
In the beginning of my reign, when I sat in the throne of ... , the great gods, my lords, entrusted me with shepherding the land of Nairi and ... I made inscribed objects and I deposited (them) for the kings ... my descendants.
You shall not change the wording of this document.
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, ...
On my second campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me and I marched to the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians, who since time immemorial had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors. In the course of my campaign, I rode on horseback and (my) personal chariot, which lays low my enemies. I cut down (and) burned their settlements. I captured (and) plundered (them). I returned safely and set foot on Assyrian soil.
The king's ... ; the rest ...
I put to the sword the population of the city Ḫirimmu, a dangerous enemy who since time immemorial had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors. I reorganized that district (and) imposed for all time one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the gods of Assyria, my lords.
which in my presence ...
I am a dead dog. I am a dog who has been cast away from the king. I am a dog who has been cast away from the king.
Witness Barruqu, ditto.
and ...
... he is ...
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
... have returned
... he is a carpenter. He is with the king.
An estate of 40 hectares of sown land ...
17th day, eponym year of Ṣalam-šarri-iqbi.
8 females of 5 spans' height;
I have fastened ...
... I am a servant of the king. If I am placed in the service of ... ,
Šumma-Adad, ... ;
8 (cuts of) meat, the ... house;
Witness Sukki-Aya.
... the king, my lord ...
Witness Aššur-šumu-uṣur.
... I conquered the land Nalû, and I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned the city ... -Aššur. I carried off the people of the lands Nalḫu, Kisik, Sumandir, (and) Bīt-Zūʾa, the fortified cities in its environs, to Assyria. I set a governor over them.
I shall see ...
If the moon's right horn at its appearance is very dark: the king of the land will extend the life.
... of the house of NN
somebody will go and bring in the daughter of Bambâ ...
Akkad ...
... all ...
An estate of Nur-Dânu, chariot driver, at the disposal of Sa'ilâ, his son.
The shepherd should be drowned in the river.
Moreover, I made the cedar roofs that I had cut from the cedar forest (and) that I had fastened on the palace, (and) the cedar beams that I had cut for the palace (and) the palace’s furniture, (and) I made (them) an object of wonder. I decorated them with precious stones (and) precious metals. I made (them) an object of wonder. I fastened bands of silver (and) gold on doors of cedar (and) cypress and I installed (them) in their gates.
Perhaps the king, our lord, will say: "... seized ... "
From Balasî.
Seal of Bel-tarṣi-iluma, eunuch of Adad-nārārī, king of the universe, of the lands of Kalḫu, Ḫaṣanu, Karkaššî, Yaluna, and Babylon.
Ešabbar, “House of plenty”: the house of Gula, the house of Biṣutu, the house of the washbasin, the house of the ziggurrat.
x cans of beer;
... all ... Now, if the king, my lord, commands: "You shall return ... " — let me return ... ; if it is acceptable to the king, my lord, let me come and see ... ; if not, let me come and see the king, my lord, and let me ... If it is acceptable to the king, my lord, let me come and ... If not, let me come and ... the rest of your gods in my hands.
May the gods who dwell in Arbela bless the king, my lord.
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, circumspect king, shepherd of the people, (and) leader of a widespread population, I:
20 ditto, ... ;
The king of Babylon and the king of the Elam had become frightened by my fierce battle array and had abandoned their chariots. They had fled alone and (then) had taken to the mountains.
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhe.
... of the daughter of ...
Adad-nārārī, overseer, son of Šamši-Adad (V), overseer, son of Shalmaneser (III), likewise  overseer.
You, my son, shall not give him to his daughter, nor shall you hand him over to his nephew. You shall not release him to an enemy. He shall die a painful death. His bones shall not be buried in the ground, but shall be burnt in the fire of the city and the open country. You shall bind his hands and feet with a dagger, an iron belt, and a sash, and shall hang his corpse on a pole.
x thousand ...
Witness Idunya, priest of Ninurta.
Palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (III), king of the universe, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also king of the universe: (brick) belonging to the New Palace of the Inner City.
... and when ...
... their ... to the king, our lord.
... you will die.
10 minas, 1/2 mina ... ,
I shall bring the horses of the enemy to the king, my lord, and receive the king's horses in return.
Ninurta-nirka-da''in.
All the work which you did in the past, you will now do again. You will take his road, and he will take his road. If he should take a road which is not his road, he will die. You will take the road which is his road, and he will live. You will seize the road which is his road, and he will live.
An estate of x hectares of land adjoining the field of ...
By the command of Aššur, I ...
If the moon at its appearance ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
x, ... , x, x, x, x — ...
Witness Zar-Issar.
Written according to the original and collated.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ninurta-belu-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord!
... the king of the great lord, the god Marduk, has greatly blessed me and ...
Witness Silim-Aššur, grand vizier.
to ...
x ... , x ... ,
Month Iyyar (II), 5th day, eponym year of NN.
... the rear of the house of Ilu-iṣṣur
Witness Nabû-rešuwa, cohort commander.
1, Tutî, village manager;
12 8, total 20 — ...
Witness Inurta-zeru-uṣur, scribe.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nadin-šumi. The very best of health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk very greatly bless the king, my lord!
Palace of Adad-nārārī, king of the universe, son of Arik-dīn-ili, king of Assyria: (brick) belonging to the courtyard.
2 black horses,
May the temples, the houses of God and the temples of the gods ...
If he does not pay, he shall pay one mina of silver.
... "the day before yesterday ...
Seal of Sa'zabadi, owner of the woman being sold.
The gate of the courtyard of Aššur, the royal gate, the gate of the ziggurrat of Ninurta, the gate of the road of the Enlil of the gods, the gate of the Igigi gate,
The king, my lord, should ask (about it). Why did he come to me, but the chariot did not come? Why did my chariot-driver not come?
Month Iyyar (II), 24th day, eponym year of Nabû-šar-ahhešu, governor of the city Samaria.
... Ariye ...
x hectares of field in the town of ... , x hectares of field in the village of Qanâ-il, ... ,
6 minas, 2 bowls ... for bowls ... ;
From Adad-šumu-uṣur.
... the governors ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ra'im-niššu. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king!
I captured the city in its entirety. I burnt the city.
... many ...
Nabû-šabši, 2 persons; Urdu-Nabû, 2 persons; Nabû-šabši, 7 persons;
2 ... ;
Whoever alters this tablet, erases it, or changes it, ... , ... this tablet, may the god Aššur, king of the gods, and the great gods, my lords, ... , overthrow his sovereignty. May they remove the image of Ashurnasirpal, king of Assyria, (and) the image of Ashurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, ... , (and) replace it with the image of his brothers. May they remove the seals of the great gods ... of the temple of ... and place (it) in the se
... his captives
"He is alive," "He is a servant of Aminu,"
... the storehouse
The 20th day: let him kill a snake: he will reach the highest rank.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your great divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
7 donkeys, 7 donkeys, the town of Habbanu;
84, 83, 22, x+30, x from the palace;
If the moon and sun are in balance: reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king's throne will become stable.
... of the fort
When they ran away, they went to the city Imme, and were caught in the city Bibuna.
A basket of ... , a bowl of ... , a basket of ... ,
Month Tebet (X), 25th day, eponym year of Mannu-ki-Adad.
they came and told me:
... huru ditto, Dari-Bel ditto, NN ... ,
... I conquered the land of the Qumānu, as far as the land Memphis. I captured the city Ḫunusâ ... I returned the plundering of the land of the Qumānu to their city. I captured the great city, the city of their kingship, and I counted (them) as booty. I brought the goddess Ištar, ... to my city Aššur ... I made them enter into a treaty and oath (sworn by the names of) the god Adad and the goddess Ištar. I settled
... the king, my lord, ...
I had a stele made of silver, gold, bronze, (and) alabaster, (and) I engraved on it images of the great gods, the god Marduk, (and) the goddess Zarpanītu, (and) images of my victory. I erected (it) for all time in their midst. I deposited my monumental inscription.
Ariyâ and Ate'-Ariyâ.
Because of the sin of Bēl-Ḫaqqē, a citizen of Assyria, I became angry and plotted evilly to level the land. I did not relent (my anger) towards Aššur, king of the gods, (but) I plotted to level the land of Aššur-nādin-apli, king of the world, my lord. I did not relent (my anger) towards Aššur, but I plotted to level the land of the king, my lord. I did not relent (my anger) towards
Bel-dan,
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Eltekeh (and) Tamnâ. I approached the city Ekron and I killed the governors (and) nobles who had committed crime(s) and hung their corpses on towers around the city; I counted the rest of the people as booty and brought (them) into my presence.
If a planet ... becomes visible: rain and flood ...
Witness Šulmu-ahhe, royal bodyguard.
6 shekels of silver, Bahianu, for Haliṣi, in exchange for a ...
Total 11 ...
Witness Kinamu.
May they make my reign as firm as a mountain!
To the king, my lord: your servant Ululayu. The best of health to the king, my lord! Assyria is well, the temples are well, all the king's forts are well. The king, my lord, can be glad indeed.
... in ...
... of Ašpa-bari
I shall send ...
... "
... to the place of battle ... Assurbanipal ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I
5 mares:
He said: "... to the deputy (governor) of ... ; the rest of the ... are appointed ... ; Aššur-... , the delegate of Ki... appointed me to the deputy (governor) in ... "
... before Bel
The orchard and the people are exempt.
The king will overthrow his enemy. He will achieve his desire. The land Elam will be put in order.
Witness ... -ahhe.
the ... eans ...
(If) he sends him, will he ... escape and live in it? In the midst of the moon, the sun, Marduk, and Nabû, in the midst of the sun, in the midst of the moon, in the midst of the stars, in the midst of the constellations, in the midst of the zenith, will he ... escape and live?
Witness Nabû-šumu-... , scribe, keeper of the contract.
... they should not be silent
... ;
... Pašitu ditto, ... ,
... they have led away ...
... Aššur-etel-ilani
The gold which the treasurer, the scribe of the palace, and I gave to them, three talents of pure gold, four talents of pure silver, and which they brought into the treasury of the chief victualler, and which the king, my lord, gave to the treasurer and the scribe of the palace, should be given to me for the purpose of making the gold shine. Let them give it to me in the month of Dabu'u.
The gods ...
Total — Ištar of the House of Kittu.
If the moon is surrounded by a halo, and Regulus stands in it: in this year women will give birth to male children.
The city of Armuḫu.
Seal of Sasî, owner of the man being sold.
News of the Babylonians: ...
... my lords ... I made them sit in their seats ... I made the offerings ... I made them rise and ... I received their audience gift(s).
Muṣaṣir ...
From Munnabitu.
Month Elul (VI), 10th day, eponym year of Banbâ, deputy minister.
adjoining ...
In the pass of the Akkadian ...
Witness Ubru-Nabû, keeper of the contract.
I restored the land of Sumer and Akkad. I reorganized the land of the Elamites, the city Kisik, the city Ḫarḫar, the land of the Medes, (and) the land Ellipi. I made (them) bow down to the yoke of (the god) Aššur. I made the Mannean(s) ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû'a. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
The Anzara, Manzarati, Igigi, Anunnaki, the gods of heaven, the Anunnaki of earth, the twin (and) the third, the lords of the underworld, the Anunnaki of the netherworld, the Anunnaki of the apsû, the Weapons, the Dahiru, Adad, the gods of heaven, ... ,
Witness Hirisayu.
May the lord of kings be everlasting! For two days ... in the city of Ša-pānī, may he be everlasting! And ... in the steppe, may he be everlasting!
... Esaggil and Babylon
Month ... , xth day, eponym year of Zazaya.
Witness NN, ... of the 'gloves' of the judge.
Now ... ru-ra'imanni ...
If the moon at its appearance is red and its left horn is pointed: the enemy land will experience hostility.
Instead of the 15 shekels of silver (due) for the day,
The king's eunuch ...
Palace of Sennacherib, king of Assyria: (This is) the audience gift that Karib-il, king of the land Saba, presented to me. (This is) the sun ... , Nabû, (and) Uraš. Whoever erases my inscribed name, may the gods Šamaš, Adad, and Ebeh ... make his name (and) his seed disappear.
... in Der
Ahi-qaba has contracted and bought him for x hundred copper shekels, as a substitute for the captives of the vizier. He shall pay double to the deputy.
an estate of 1 hectare 2 decares adjoining ditto of Marduk-ereš and the king's road;
We kept watch on the 29th day; we did not see the moon. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
in all, 6: the 'residences' of the ...
... the town of Ḫatarikka, the town of Ṣupba
In the beginning of my sovereignty, I brought about the defeat of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), king of Karduniaš (Babylonia), together with the troops of (the land) Elam, in the plain of Kish. In the midst of that battle he abandoned his camp, fled alone, and set out for the land Guzummānu. He crossed the Euphrates and the Uqnû Rivers (and) made his way through the mountains. He (Merodach-baladan
To Ilu-šumu-...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-metu-uballiṭ. The very best of health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk very greatly bless the king, my lord!
... there is ... against them
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-belu-taqqin. Good health to the king, my lord!
4 minas of silver, 3 togas, 3 tunics: the chief eunuch;
2 ... ,
... here
and ... their ... ; now ...
... of the town of Sarugi
Month Elul (VI), 20th day, eponym year of Dadi-metu.
in the succession palace ...
... he does not exist. The ... who ... the city ... sara and the exempt ... who ... the ziggurrat ... who ... he plundered ... he captured ... he carried off to his (own) land.
... the town of Šumu-... ,
... ;
When he has finished, he will say: "...
Concerning the reinforcements about which the king, my lord, wrote to me, I have set out and am marching. I will set up camp before the pass and ascend it. Now, I am waiting for the rest of the reinforcements.
... we shall send
x+20 hectares ... ,
... Assyria ...
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
On my second campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me and I marched to the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians, a dangerous enemy who since time immemorial had not respected the kings, my ancestors, but had attacked (and) plundered in the mountains. With the support of the god Aššur, I rode on horseback and (then) I took the road in a chariot. I fought with them (and) defeated them. I captured alive the king of the Kassites and the king of the Yas
Witness Ilu-mukin-apli, chariot fighter of the governor.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your great divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
... upon ...
Witness Aššur-...
The queen mother is saying: "Come, queen mother, daughter of Kinnati!"
La-baši is a competent scribe. He is useful to the king, my lord.
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial audience gift from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
... sickness ...
... I received as my tribute. I received ... , linen garments with multi-colored trim, eunuchs, criminals, ... , horses of Egypt ...
The king wrote to me: "You shall do the work of ... the gods will not let you ... ; the goddess Gula of ... the goddess Gula of the steppe will ... "
4 litres of honey ... ;
Witness Silim-Aššur, horse trainer.
... ;
The king, my lord, should send a prefect to come and stay with me until the logs arrive.
From Rašil the older, servant of the king.
Total, the commander-in-chief.
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... I gave to Bel ...
130 ... ,
You, the goddess Bēlet-balaṭi, the lady of warfare, the one who makes the gods, the father of whom you created, take the road to the king, the one who has made Teumman, the king of the land Elam, who had come to the god Aššur, the king of the gods, my father, and committed a crime against him, flee from him, and go to Assyria.
When I was here, the king, my lord, asked his servant about the work, and I was doing the work. I have now been removed from the presence of the king, my lord.
Month Adar (XII), 7th day, eponym year of Abi-ram, grand vizier.
Witness Pa-šarru-uṣur.
When I heard (this), I ...
Bel-dan,
Will he abandon his people? Will he flee?
The temple of Kullabšarru, the exalted shrine, had become old and I completely rebuilt it.
Concerning the news of the king, my lord, I have stationed my whole army at the king's mother's side.
... my fish
Tribute from the land of the Habruri.
did not come ...
Shalmaneser, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (I), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of Aššur: builder of Ekur, the cult center of the gods.
Concerning the watch about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... upon the watch of the crown prince" —
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have seen fear and terror at night, or (that) the oracle query has become jumbled and impaired in my mouth...
Usi... , his maid, son of Gadi... ,
... my ... , who ... my desire ... , who ... the wide underworld and ... Esarhaddon, shepherd of the people, ... the Akitu House, ...
A stone weight was weighed on a scale, and it weighed 10 minas.
... his army ...
... their fields ...
... the king ...
I appointed two guards and two ... in their service. I gave them the following orders: "Take care of their food, they should not go out alone."
... they have gone ...
Disregard that they may think about it, turn back, and go away...
As to what the king of all lands, my lord, wrote to me: "Go and ... where he is staying" —
Your servant Nabû-bel-šumati: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: I have sent my messenger to greet the king, the horses and the troops.
The sun which makes an eclipse, is the moon which was seen at the king's appearance. It is (equivalent to) the eclipse.
... fish
A tablet of Aššur-zeru-ibni to Nergal-eṭir. Good health to my brother!
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. The best of health to the king, my lord!
x hectares of land in the town of Paru, adjoining the road of Calah, adjoining the field of Aya-tunu, adjoining the field of Aya-tunu, adjoining the road to Calah.
Will Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, be troubled and angry? Does your great divinity know it?
... the king, our lord,
Witness Batunu, scribe.
... they shall glaze bricks
of ...
... I will not change his mind. The lady ...
Let their messenger come ...
Month ... , 1st day, the moon became visible.
Uaiteʾ (Iautaʾ), together with his troops, who had not feared the weapons of (the god) Aššur, my lord, and had plundered the land of Nanû — the god Erra had become angry with them and inflicted a defeat on them. He carried off their sons, their possessions, (and) their property. He did not leave a single one of them alive. The gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Adad, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh
I am a hero, I am a warrior, I am a virile lion, I am foremost, I am exalted, I am a virile lion, I am foremost, I am exalted, I am a hero, I am a warrior, I am a virile lion, I am foremost, I am exalted, I am a hero, I am a warrior, I am a virile lion, I am foremost, I am exalted, I am a hero, I am a warrior, I am a virile lion, I am foremost, I am exalt
in the temple ...
... outside ...
It is said: "The fish are scarce."
“The ox which he offers is his own flesh. He is killed by the sword which he wields.”
Marduk, sage of the gods, lord of the great assembly, and Anunnaki, the great gods, and Nergal, the perfect one, and Nusku, the exalted one, the holy scepter, the star of the sky, the spouse of Mullissu, the spouse of the Enlil of the gods, the great gods, the goddess Ištar, who is clothed in the awe-inspiring radiance of heaven and earth,
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract, whether the queen or the palace herald, or the attendants of the palace, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against me, whether by force or by treachery, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against me, and says: "I will destroy your tomb," may the god Uraš strike him down with a fierce weapon and not let him live. May he not be buried in a tomb but be thrown into a river, may he not be able to return alive to his family.
Your servant Ina-tešî-eṭir: I would gladly die for the king of the lands, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king of the lands, my lord! Say to the king of the lands, my lord:
Concerning the ...
... he will make you attain ...
The former ... s of the king, my lord, are dead.
I was troubled and worried, and my heart was restless. I said: "Who is this woman, who is causing me to be troubled?" The sun was rising, it was early morning. I ... their ... , I sent ...
Intercalary Adar (XII), ... th day, eponymy of NN, governor of ...
... set to ...
to ...
and ... with them ...
... Nabû-killanni
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract, may Aššur, Sin, Šamaš, Bel, Nabû, and the gods of the king take him into his hands.
Witness Nabû-nammir, ...
Now, I have sent you a letter from Aššur-ahu-iddina. I have fastened four letters of Assyria on you, and I have entrusted to you the enemy who has seized your people.
... before me
Witness NN, scribe.
May the king, my lord, be happy! This land ...
To the king, my lord: your servant, the commander-of-ten of Arbela. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I am herewith sending you ...
52 in all from Arpad;
... , 3 2-year-olds,
I shall send ...
To the governor, my lord: your servant Nabû-duru-uṣur. Good health to my lord! The city of Der is well.
... I will do the work ...
... will catch the pursued one in the plain.
Witness NN, scribe.
In the future, in far-off days, may a later prince restore its weakened (portions). May he restore my inscribed name to its place. (Then) the god Nabû, the august heir, will listen to his prayers. May he grant him a scepter (and) a throne, and may he rule as he wishes.
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
The gods Aššur, Nabû, (and) Marduk granted me a reign without equal and made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises.
his 2 sons, in all 4; the man from Arrapha, Tu'a, his wife, Siti-... , Nergal-iddin, in all 20 deportees, servants of Arbailayu —
... to Nineveh ... , and I shall appoint ...
In the future may a later prince, when that wall becomes old and dilapidated, restore it. May he restore my inscribed name and my monumental inscription to its place. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
At that time, in my city Kār-Tukultī-Ninurta, I built Egalzagdinutukua, the temple of the god Aššur, my lord. I named it Egalzagdinutukua (“House, the Great Mountain of the Lands”). I built Egalzagdinutukua, the ziggurrat, for the repose of the god Aššur, my lord, and for my life and the life of my city.
... have been plundered in the house of ...
... the king, my lord
... I said to him:
Zeru-ukin has paid Ahu-iddin in full.
... the king, my lord ...
to NN ...
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
Witness ... -gamil. Witness Arakki.
... I filled (it) with ... I ... the lands Muṣru (and) Ḫatti (Syria-Palestine). I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I
1, the daughter of the commandant ... ;
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Witness Izbu, butcher.
The king of Šibaniba heard about this and sent me a sealed document, saying: "I will give you the gold and silver."
Ashur-ilaya,
cure of ...
1, overseer(s) of the streets;
... field ... in Šabirešu ...
It shall increase by a fourth.
Witness Aššur-le'i, ...
Šamaš-ila'i, chief ... , has contracted and bought him from Lu-balaṭ, for x minas of silver.
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, the one who is assiduous towards their shrines, the one who provides for the cult centers, the one who is constantly attentive to their will, (and) the one who reveres their great divinity —
x male sheep, of Se'-... , chief shepherd, son of Aqar-... ;
Eight ... , who ... to the king, my lord, ...
(As for) Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, the brother of the enemy who had plotted evil (deeds) against Assyria and had uttered grievous blasphemies against (the god) Aššur, the god who created me, he (the god Aššur) determined a cruel death for him and he (Šamaš-šuma-ukīn) passed away (while he was) in the midst of the sea.
Your servant Hampyus: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to my lord:
Month Kislīmu, 3rd day, eponym year of Sennacherib.
Witness ... zera. Witness NN, palace woman.
5 cans of beer;
These are the gods. If you appoint him over Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, and Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, and his brothers, sons, and relatives, whom Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, and the rest of the offspring of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, have raised and educated, and who have sworn an oath by the name of their god(s), and if he should sin against his word, and if he should cause others to sin against it,
I shall wait for him ... , and afterwards I shall go to my presence.
At that time, the temple of the god Nabû, which Adad-nārārī (I), son of Šamšī-Adad (I), king of Assyria, a former king, my forefather, had built, had become old and dilapidated. I removed its dilapidated section(s) by means of (10) digging and excavation. I laid its foundation(s) on top of limestone and bitumen. I fastened bands of silver and gold on beams of cedar (and) cypress and I secured (
... the city Gambulu, I destroyed its settlements ... the city Gambulu, I ... Sargon (II),
... are empty
... 23 persons ... , cohort commander ...
Witness Remanni-Adad, carpenter.
From Dur-Šarruken.
3 copper pots;
As to Aššur-ra'im-šarri ...
Witness Nergal-šarru-uṣur, 'third man.'
... in the eyes of the tree
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods:
He shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
They are staying in Sadiru. They say: "We have been sent to ... "
One official who is not trusted, one official who is not trusted, who is appointed to the position of the king's representative, one official appointed to the position of the king's representative, one official appointed to the position of the king's representative, one official appointed to the position of the king's representative, one official appointed to the position of the king's representative, one official appointed to the position of the king's representative, one official appointed to the position of the king's representative, one official appointed to the position of the king's representative, one official appointed to the position of the king'
... as follows: "When the village of Anunitu was destroyed, the whole city rejoiced."
... before the gods
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, ask him what his case is.
3 ... ;
You sing, “... , creation of the sun, whose light is bright.”
(Property) of the singer.
May they (= all the gods) make evil and wicked things surround you like fire.
... in the hands of my messenger
The king, my lord, said: "They are not good." Ashur-dan, son of Nadinu, the criminal and the arsonid are ...
Witness Pan-Issar-lamur.
... and ...
(As for) Eḫulḫul, the temple of the goddess Ištar, my lady, which is inside Eanna, which a former king had built but whose construction was not completed, I made its design more splendid than before and (then) I made (it) an object of wonder. I made the dais of the goddess Ištar, the great lady, resplendent and (then) I made (it) an object of wonder. I offered sumptuous offerings and presented my gift(s).
Witness Nabû-eriba, deputy team commander.
You shall not make common cause with the enemies of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, against Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, and his brothers, the sons of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, but you shall return the favour which Aššur, father of the great gods, has bestowed upon you.
Haya, Kusu, in the courtyard of the Anunnaki, the courtyard in the top of the well, the House of Ea-šarru, Damkina, Išhara, Qingu, Maliku, Uqur, total in the House of Ea-šarru.
I built a house in the citadel of Nineveh, opposite the temple of the gods Sîn and Šamaš, for the royal residence of Aššur-ahu-iddina, my favorite son.
From this day, the 10th day of this month, the month ... , to the ... th day of the month ... of the coming year, for 30 days and nights, my stipulated term —
Disregard that he may go down to the river and cross over to the city Ashkelon ...
Witness Balasî, servant of ...
which they killed ...
I have not heard (anything) and have not seen (anything).
x ... s of chariots, 30 oxen, and a band of she-camels;
x rings, gold ... ,
An estate of 40 hectares of land in the town of ...
The remission of debts which Nabû-šumu-iškun and Adad-... gave to Bel-duri, the governor, and Bel-duri gave to Šakin-ya.
... you did not know ... you killed your ... and your heart was filled with anger. Who did you appoint? Who did you name? Who did you make take the road to ... ?
The 12th day: at court, favorable.
Banaya,
If he does not pay, he shall pay the donkey in its original amount to Adad-belu-na'id.
Month ... , xth day, eponym year of Manzarnê, ... of the palace.
84 leather straps were purchased for 2 minas and 53 shekels of silver from Kummuh. The merchants have not yet paid (them).
3 2-seah jars of hinhinu-seeds;
his sons ...
... as it says in this papyrus
Month Shebat (XI), 1st day, eponym year of Zazakku.
until the army has passed by, let him enjoy his field.
... from ...
... the town and ...
Should Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, appoint him to a position of his choosing? Is it pleasing to your great divinity? Is it acceptable to the great lord, Marduk?
Witness Namû.
I put to the sword the population of the city Ḫirimmu, a dangerous enemy, and I did not spare a single one. I hung their corpses on towers around the city; I reorganized that district (and) imposed for eternity one ox, ten bulls, ten sheep, ten donkeys, (and) ten camels as his first-fruits offerings to the gods of Assyria, my lords.
2 cuts of shoulders from an ox of the temple of Dagan, chief cupbearer.
I gave ...
Month Adar (XII), 18th day.
Who is taking away the barley? The king, my lord, should know it.
... in Nanaya, when the king my lord's word ... , the king my lord should not be concerned. May the king my lord send me to the Palace of the king, my lord, and may the king, my lord, appoint me to the service of the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, send me to Babylon, my brothers, and may I see the face of my lord.
1, the man from Birtu;
... ditto;
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
... adjoining the road that leads to the village of Bir-...
... chariot, 2 ... ,
This is its interpretation.
... is placed. The front of the washbasin is smashed.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, should send Nabû-šarru-uṣur, rab mūgi, to Ikkalû,
Ištar, lady ... , ...
May Palil, lord of victory, cut off your flesh and send you to the Abyss.
Total, 4 ...
... in my presence
adjoining the field of Gubalayu,
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. The best of health to the king, my lord!
As to the news of the city of Assur, he is in the city of ... ; the king, my lord, wrote to me, and I am herewith sending him to you:
On the xth day he sent his messenger to Parsua, saying: "... my ... " He sent him to Bit-Bunakki with a caravan of 30 (homers) of flour. He said: "I will go to the son of Daltâ ... " The king of Elam will go to Bit-Bunakki. His 30 chariots will go with the king to Bit-Bunakki.
Now ...
9 Kassite women;
As to the chariot owner from Que about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Ask him!" — he has no bread, no seed, and no ...
1 of carnelian;
... is split. In ...
2 homers of crushed grain;
I told the governor of Calah: "There is a pile of reed in the district of Ubasê. Let them give me the reed so I can make the basket."
shall place 10 minas of silver and x minas of gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
35 hectares, ditto, ditto, the wine manager;
From Pan-Marduk.
1 mina — Nabû-...
40 ditto of huhurrutu-type bread;
The nobles who had come, had burnt the cities, and had plundered the people. They said: "We will not plunder the city, we will ... its ... "
To the vizier, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. Good health to the vizier, my lord!
Witness Ilumma-le'i.
6 oxen, 40 hectares of arable land near the city of Harran, 100 hectares under cultivation therein.
... is finished
x, the weapon of the top of ... , 10, the 'outside' ... ;
Šamaš-šumu-ukin is doing very, very well; he is not sick. What is it that the king, my lord, commands?
To the king, my lord: your servant Šulmu-beli. Good health to the king, my lord!
Arbakku of the land Arnaksi,
or in ... ,
Witness Zababa-eriba, 'third man.'
in ...
Concerning the horses of the tribute of the king, my lord, ... the king, my lord, ...
Aššur will ...
... letter
NN, farmer, 1 woman, 1 house, in the town of Balihu.
x, in the charge of Huda-Dada,
... Sivan (III) ...
... in their presence
... the governors
... their ... in ...
The king should know that your servants are being sold for money."
... Belat-ekalli
... I will not go to Sūḫu.
... of Nabû-šarru-ukin ...
... in the presence of ... Aššur-rēša-iši ... to do him good ... he built ...
As the king, my lord, ... , I shall bring the fort back to order and send the men into it.
... this
... to the sons of Zazaki
1, open chariotry,
I have appealed to the king, my lord, on account of my case.
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number. I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire the city Ṣiṣṣirtu, a city that was a fortress. I added (this city) to the territory of Assyria.
Guzana
If Venus is set in the west: the king of Akkad will exercise complete dominion.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
x ... , x ... ,
... , lamentation-priest;
... Arbela
x talents 4 1/2 minas of lapislazuli;
a cup of ... ;
... against the Assyrians ...
... he will die.
10 shekels of silver belonging to Urad-Aya, at the disposal of Ki-bir-Aya.
... ayu, governor;
Month of the Open Gate, eponym year of Atar-ili, governor of the city Laḫīru.
10 minas of silver ...
... I myself ... I set off ... my feet ...
... Now he has run away and come ... , and the chief ...
... the king, my lord, ...
Witness Haldi-aha-uṣur, royal bodyguard.
Your servant Salamanu: I would gladly die for the palace, my lord! Say to the palace and ... my lord: The land of the king is well.
I engraved on large limestone slabs (images of) the enemy settlements that I had conquered. I surrounded their (the palace rooms’) lower courses (with them and) fastened bands of copper and bronze on them.
... Sa'ilu, Marduk-šumu-uṣur, ...
From Ammu-la-Baši.
If Venus becomes visible in Ab (V): there will be a rebellion, and Elam will experience ...
in the days of ...
... quickly ...
May Anu, Illil and Ea give you happiness, joy and joy! May the great Lady, the great Lady of Esaggil, who loves you, keep you alive!
"... "
From Nabû-iqbi.
x, overseer(s) of the streets, 14, overseer(s) of the streets, 10, overseer(s) of the streets,
... seized ...
NN, ... , his son.
Witness Aššur-le'i, 'third man.'
Issar-šakin-... ,
The one who is appointed over the house of the crown prince, over the house of the 'finger' and over the house of the 'wrist' — the one appointed over the house of the crown prince is Remanni-Aššur.
Milki-Adad,
... Si-abu, ...
The lady of his palace will go out to greet the land of Hatti and Elam.
Concerning the repair of the second (temple) of Sîn,
... chariot ...
... what
... the king, my lord
... his word
... the ... s of ... are ... The ... s of ... are ...
1 sheep for ablution — of the ...
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
The king should do as he deems best.
Sagibiî, ... ;
or Kastaritu, city lord of Kar-Tikrak, or Dusani, a Sapardean, or Cimmerian, or Mannean, or any enemy at all, will capture that city, Kišman,
... house ...
At the beginning of my sovereignty, in my first regnal year, when the god Aššur, king of the gods, sat on my (own) throne, the god Anu, the creator of everything, the god Enlil, the father of the throne, the god Ninurta, who lays low the enemy land, and the goddess Ištar, who goes at the side of the warrior, the god Nergal, who lays low the land of Subartu and scatters the troops,
On the 1st day ... Nergal, the lord of the underworld, ... I myself shall go and tell him. The king of all lands, my lord, will take the road to Babylon.
x seahs 8 'litres',
In the course of their campaign, they (the Medes) inflicted a defeat on the people of the land of the Kummuḫu, who live in the mountains. They carried off captives, plundering, (and) booty from them. They burnt the city, destroyed the settlements, (and) devastated the district. They ... the people ... , inflicted a defeat on the people ... , (and) plundered the district.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it? Does Aššur hear it?
I shall destroy ...
The king, my lord, should have a look at the many letters which have been sent to me. The letters which have been sent to me are many, (but) they have been sent in a few days only. The letters have been sent in batches, and have been read. What else? Let them send the rest of the letters to me.
By means of the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord, and your favorable decisions,
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
... the king, my lord, should ...
I shall ... as long as I am in Bit-Kisiya.
... the palace ... the people of the cities ... I captured ... I brought to Nineveh ... between ... I captured as booty ... I counted (them) as booty.
... as far as the river
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "What news of the son of Zerî?" He has gone to Puqudu and returned from Uruk. My messenger has gone to Sapia and returned. As soon as he returns, I shall send a detailed report to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, can be glad indeed.
... our watch has been kept
There is a hole in the middle surface of the lung at the right and left.
x minas of silver, of Iddin-Ea, deputy of the city of Haurina.
Whoever breaks the contract, whether Remanni-Adad, chariot driver, or his sons or grandsons, shall pay one talent of refined silver and one mina of pure gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his 'no-lawsuit' and not succeed.
Witness Nabû-šezib, chariot driver.
... I said to him, "...
If the earth quakes all over the world like this: good for the land, bad for the Westland.
589 horses and 8 mules in all —
Palace of Sargon (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad.
Assurbanipal, the crown prince of the Succession Palace, ... , is placed as a pledge at your disposal.
If Venus is dark: the days of the king will be long.
The one who is assiduous towards their shrines, who is constantly attentive to their command, who is assiduous towards the palace, and who has read the tablets of the scribal lore of the gods of heaven and earth — I am that one.
... why
14 ... ;
Nabû-šar-ahhešu;
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, scribe.
... you should have sent me ... or ... , and I would have gone to Akkad and done the work. If the eunuch ... , why did he not do the work? And why did he make ... and do the work?
Now, they have sent me a sealed document, saying: "You and your father shall act as if (you were) one person."
He shall pay the silver within two years. He shall enjoy the field as a pledge.
8 'litres' ... ;
Now then, the whole city of Kumme is plotting against Ariye ... , and they are plotting to kill him. The delegate ...
I have sent ...
and ... to the lord of the House of Ištar, to the House of Kulittu, to the House of the Seven Gods, to the House of Adad of the Kassites, to the House of Adad of the Kassites, to the House of Adad of the Kassites, to the House of Adad of the Kassites, to the House of Adad of the Kassites, to the House of Adad of the Kassites, to the House of Adad of the Kassites, to the House of Adad of the Kassites, to
Land of the Aya, Land of ... ,
I captured the people, chariots, (and) army of the enemy. I captured the cities Libê, Kalḫu, Sumurra, (and) Apqu, which are in the mountains. I captured the cities Uriakka, Arbela, Aruru, (and) Aruru-šumma-iddina, which are in the mountains. I captured the cities Ušrina, Kurbail, (and) Aruru, which are in the mountains. I captured the cities Uṣurzunna, Arbela, Aruru, (and) Aruru
You put a libation bowl of water on the neck ... , pour a libation bowl of water on the neck, and sing, “You are exalted, you are glorious.”
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-šumu-ukin. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I set my mind on the city Susa, the seat of the god Adad. I made a plan and (then) I made the people of the city Susa who had committed a crime against the god Aššur not obey the command(s) of the god Aššur and I imposed upon them a heavy tribute. I brought out the property of the city Susa which had been plundered by the god Ḫaldi (and) I counted (it) as booty. I brought out the seed of the land Urarṭu, the offspring of the god
Se'-dalâ,
... of the report of the king ...
Witness Mannu-ki-Ninua, ...
... Now then
If the moon and sun are in opposition: there will be truth in the land, and the son will speak the truth with his father.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether these men or their sons or grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Kukullanu and his sons,
Witness Nabû-šallimšunu.
News of ...
(As for) Umba-Lagabua, who sat on the throne of the land Elam after Ummanaldašu (Ḫumban-ḫaltaš III), he abandoned the city Bubilu, a city that was a lordly residence of his, and (then) fled and took to the mountains.
from the town ...
To the goddess Ištar, the lady of the lands, the one who brings the gods together, the one who ... , the one who makes the scepter grow, the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the
On the 18th day the king went down to the House of God.
... many ... s have been killed in the course of the campaign.
To the king of the lands, my lord: your servant Bel-ušezib. May Bel, Nabû and Šamaš bless the king, my lord!
... Merodach-Baladan from ...
x straight garments, ditto, ... ;
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
The city-lord ... said: "I have ... ed the houses, but they have not yet return to their (proper) position.
his scribe.
... will go
I have not yet left for the king, my lord. I have been staying at home, and he has been staying at my disposal. When the king, my lord, sent me, I went and demolished the house of Uqiya, saying: "Why did he attack the chief cupbearer? What are his motives?"
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Total 71, the cupbearer, for Nineveh.
Disregard that the day is overcast and it has rained...
the men ...
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
... Ištar ...
Nabû-šarru-uṣur says: "...
Seal of Nabû-šallim-ahhe, son of Pan-Nabû-ṭemi,
If Venus comes close to Sagittarius: the king of the Westland will extend the life ... ; the enemy land will ... Man(nu)-nādin-aḫḫē ...
In Kislīmu, on the 15th day, Nergal-libbi-ališti should take the road and go to the camp.
... the stone thresholds
The money is paid completely. That woman is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Total, 6 ...
May Anu, father of the gods, look upon him angrily and command his destruction! May Illil, lord of creation, command his life to be short! May the days of his reign be dark and gloomy!
1, mayor of Arbela;
200, funerary offering,
Witness DN.
before ...
... Now ...
NN, gardener of the vineyard ...
If on the 16th day the moon and sun are seen together: the king will exercise world dominion; the king will go to his palace for a good cause; the enemy will fall; the king will overthrow the enemy's land; the enemy will experience misfortune.
If Adad thunders in the land: there will be an eclipse of the king of the Westland, and his land will diminish.
The gatekeeper at the gate ...
... his people
This night the moon was surrounded by a halo. Scorpius stood in it.
10 hectares — the town ...
Sû, his servant —
x hectares in Kulunna;
Jupiter stood in the sky for a number of days.
From Bulluṭu.
Kamanu, his servant, a Tabalite,
... saw ...
... ;
By the command of the great gods, I became angry and plotted evilly. I was filled with rage and my heart was inflamed. I plotted to go to the land of the Lullumu, to kill, plunder, and loot.
... the xth day, let them give out ...
2 ditto, ditto, the front ditto, 1 1/4;
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have seen fear and terror at night, or (that) the oracle query has become jumbled and impaired in my mouth...
Tiglath-pileser, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, conqueror of the land of the Anunnaki and the land of the Ḫabḫu, the one who brought about the defeat of the land of the Zabarzi, the one who conquered the land of the Puglu, (and) the one who brought about the defeat of the land of the Alzu, the one who subdued the land of the Buruḫu, the one who conquered the land of the Arzizu, the one who conquered
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also king of the world (and) king of Assyria: (brick) belonging to the terrace of Mount Haruru, from the pass of Mount Habruri to the pass of Mount Šubria, from the opposite bank of the Tigris to the land ��
... who did not submit to the kings, my ancestors, and did not send his message, ... the terrifying splendor of (the god) Aššur, my lord, overwhelmed him and he sent his envoys to the city Kalḫu, before me.
Witness Remanni-Adad.
... Milki-suri... , his wife,
The adjutant who brings them out ...
The 2nd day you will be with me ...
Month of Tammuz (IV), 22nd day, in the city of Adian.
Month ... , 8th day, eponym year of Aššur-da''inanni.
in all, 78 ... men.
Tribute of Kutti-Aššur. The Kummuhites, Raḫiānu, (and) Meṣiḫim, the Samarians, Ḫirumu, Tyre, Si(b)i, Qūdi, Uriakka, Qūdi-Baʾlu, Pi(ṣi)ri, Carchemishite, Eni-il, Ḫammu, Pa(na)-naʾid, Saʾalli, Gubla, Uriakki, Qūdi, (and) Samʾal
Written according to its original and collated.
My brother has not yet returned from my men. The 'third man' has not yet returned to me. The rest of the troops of the city lords are in my presence.
The base of the middle part is 'bound.' The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number. The heart of the ram is normal. Check-up...
... I said: "...
1 ring, 9 mares:
... them ...
... to his brother ...
The king's servants in the ... palace ... to the governor ...
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, have jumbled the oracle query in my mouth, or changed (or) altered the proceedings...
Now ...
... have run away
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ahhe-eriba. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
La-qepu ...
... ditto;
I will not ... , I will not ... , I will not ... , I will not ... , I will not ... , I will not ... , I will not ... , I will not ... , I will not ... , I will not ... , I will not ... , I will not ... , I will not ... , I will not ... , I will not ... , I will not ... , I will not ... , I will not ... , I will not ... , I will not ... , I will not ... , I will not ... , I will not ... , I will not ... , I will not ... , I will not
The king should ask the deputy (governor) of ... why the king's fortified outposts have been abandoned. These days, when you are keeping watch,
Witness Banitu. Witness Urda-Nanaya.
... the 7th day is good, the 8th day ...
The god Aššur, the god Šamaš, the god Adad, the god Ber, ... , the god Aššur, the lord, the great gods, the exalted one, the goddess Ištar, the queen, the goddess Ištar of Arbela, the goddess Gula, the one who is clothed in ... , the lord of the entire universe, ... , the lady of the entirety, the one who is clothed in ... , the lady of the holy cities,
To the king, my lord: your servant Šarru-ila'i. Good health to the king, my lord!
... the king's men
Balasî ...
and the ... of Kunu ...
Witness NN.
... the king, my lord
Witness Ibašši-ilani, son of Nergal-ila'i.
x copper cooking pots;
of the king, my lord, ...
Uasî, son of Tala'a, gardener; Našuh-deni, 3 women;
(As for) Gugū, king of the land Lullumuna, a rebellious and insubmissive ruler who did not honor the oath(s sworn) by the kings, my ancestors, and did not respect the treaty (sworn) by the god Aššur (and) the goddess Babu, saying: “Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract of my royal majesty, the treaty of the gods, (and) the oath of the lord of lords, and (whom) your (pl.) hands caught hold of
Who is this man who is plotting these things against the king, my lord? I will send him to the king, my lord, tomorrow. Who is he?
I placed eunuchs of mine as provincial governors over them (the people of the land Ḫanigalbat). I captured the city Qirbit, his fortified city, (and) I destroyed (and) devastated it. I burnt the city, together with (other) settlements in its environs.
... three ...
an estate of 8 decares of field adjoining the side road of Sairi, adjoining the field of Bel-ibni,
Concerning Šarru-emuranni about whom the king, my lord, gave me orders: "Let the horses and men come!" — they have come, but have not yet arrived at the king's presence.
20 hectares of arable land, 10 hectares under cultivation therein.
x mules from Kilizi:
To the king, my lord: your servant ... lu. Good health to the king, my lord!
The scholars ... as far as the city Ubibisi ...
... his ...
x ... of linen, x ... -garments,
Ea, who makes firm the foundations of my throne, who opens the gate of the apsû, who makes the foundations of the gate of the ziggurrat firm,
... to your aid which ...
Concerning the king, my lord, I have sent 260 horses and 13 men, and I have sent 277 horses and 15 men. In all, I have sent 527 horses and 28 men to them. The scribe is in the presence of the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should question him.
I told Belšunu: "Send me some men to keep watch for me!"
which in the palace of the king ...
Adad-nārārī, king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, son of Arik-dīn-ili, king of Assyria, son of Enlil-nārārī, (who was) also king of Assyria.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
From Rašil the older, servant of the king.
This is the (complete) commentary.
Total 160 tables, consumption.
until ...
... of the king ...
the snake ...
... shekels of silver upon him ...
... to the king, my lord
From Balasî.
... to the king
... at the feet
1 writing-board ... ,
The horse trainer has come in today.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, should go to the house of Nabû in ... ,
... he returned his robes to him, and sent him back to his country.
I will destroy ...
... who ... I built (it) from top to bottom. I deposited my clay cone.
... their ... , to the house of ...
The lower part is elevated ...
The orchard which is between Aššur and Mulliltu —
and when the chief tailor said: "I will cut off the king's ... " he did not obey, but said: "I will cut off the king's ... "
x, x, x, x — the 'head' of the lung.
The evil which they did to you, which they plotted against you, and which they committed in Bit-Bunakka —
(As for) me, Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who (re)confirmed the treaty (sworn) by the gods, I made the people of Chaldea, the Manneans, the Queans, the Ḫilakku, and the Tyrians bow down at my feet and they (now) pull my yoke.
Witness Aššur-reṣuwa, eunuch, scribe of the queen.
... their harvest
... they will send ... to the king, my lord.
... you will say ...
of the weapon ...
Witness Šamaš. Witness Nergal.
To the god Aššur, father of the gods, the great lord, his lord:
and Nabû-ušallim ...
I, Nabû-naṣir, king of Babylon, the one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, the one who reveres the great gods,
The 'third man' of the chariot ...
Four talents of iron, capital, belonging to the ironsmith of the Inner City, are not being sold for one mina of silver in Harran.
... house ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your great divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
What the king, my lord, gave to the son of Dakuri, and what the king, my lord, said: "Give ... to the son of Dakuri!" —
The king, my lord, should send a messenger to the Inner City, Arbela, and ...
saying: "The old one ...
NN, shepherd; in all x persons, the town of Til-uṣi, in the district of the town Sarugi.
Witness Zarutî, cohort commander.
Marduk-apla-iddina ...
... , farmer, his servant,
Witness Abdi-Ramman, ...
You shall not make common cause with the enemy of your lord, nor with the son of your lord, nor with the king or the prince, nor with any other person.
He said: "He has committed a crime against me. He has plundered my country and ... ed my people.
Month Tishri (VII), xth day, eponym year of Nabû-kenu-uṣur.
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
(As for) the one who alters my handiwork, may the gods Aššur, Adad, (and) the great gods glare at him angrily and make his name (and) his seed disappear from the land.
Witness Aisi.
The engraver who ... , who said: "I will not ... against anybody,"
Witness Paqa-aha, village manager.
Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Concerning the fort about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "I will receive it" — Zalaya, the ... ean, ... ed in our presence, saying: "I will give it to you."
... I will come, and the mayor
all the throne ...
... they do not do the work. They are not doing it.
10 ... ;
... word ...
... months
Ditto by Ištar of Nineveh and Ištar of Arbela!
In the future, may a future ruler, one of the kings, my descendants, whom Aššur and Ištar nominate for ruling over the land and people, renovate its dilapidated section(s) when this wall becomes old and dilapidated. May he find an inscribed object bearing my name, anoint (it) with oil, make an offering, (and) return (it) to its place.
Witness Aplaya, enemy of Bel-ša-iqbi.
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Now, the messengers of the sons of Mukin-zeri have gone up to the Puqudu ...
If the sun rises and its light is red: ...
Witness Nuhšaya, porter.
You set up two tufts of wick, one before Šamaš, the other before Adad.
... you are a man ...
Month ... , xth day, eponym year of Šulmu-... , governor of ...
2 ... ;
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
As to what you wrote to me: "When the king, my lord, sent me his servants, I sent them to him, but they were treated like this: 'Send the men of Que to the king, my lord! The king, my lord, will send back the men of Que to you'" — I have sent all the men of Que who are in your service to Bel-la-taqqin, saying: "Send them to me!"
Nabû-naʾid (and) Bēl-eṭir, sons of Nabû-šuma-ēreš, the šandabakku (governor of Nippur) whose father had fled to the land Akkad, (and) who had come up from the land Gambulu to Assyria, (and) who had set their minds on the governorship of Babylon — their sons,
Bel-iqišanni,
Witness NN. Witness Barruqu.
I have written to Urmah ...
Witness Qulî.
all to ...
Concerning the farmer, the shepherd and the ...
In the month of Tishri (VII) the watch of the moon is (kept) for me.
This from Aššur-ayyali.
which you ...
The people and their houses
The king ... upon the rikshaw ...
A letter of the palace superintendent to Indabiya and Uraš-... , my sons.
I shall send you ...
Nabû-eriba, son of Nabû-šallim, ...
The silver shall increase by a third.
23 horses in all;
Month Ab (V), 18th day, eponym year of NN.
After the king, my lord, sat on the throne, Bel-ahhe-eriba ... came and ... from the day he went ...
... the bakers, as ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-šumu-ukin. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur bless the king, my lord!
The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number. Check-up...
If Aššur-ahu-iddina, king of Assyria, goes to the aid of his sons in battle, Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, will seize the throne of Assyria, and Šamaš-šumu-ukin, his brother, will seize the throne of Babylon. He will exercise the kingship of Babylon and the kingship of Sumer and Akkad. He will rule the land of Galaṭu in the name of Aššur-ahu-iddina, king of Assyria, his father.
He shall pay double in the centre of Argasu. If he does not pay, it shall increase by 5 seahs per homer.
1 silver tribute bowl;
In Baltil (Aššur), the cult center of the king of the gods, the god Aššur, I built Ešarra, the temple of the god Aššur, for the sake of my life, the well-being of my city, the happiness of my reign, the securing of the foundation(s), the strengthening of the brickwork, the (re)confirmation of the terrace, (and) the well-being of my daughter, the king.
NN, ditto;
... today
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did they give it to you?" It is given to you for the sake of the life of the woman being sold.
straw ...
The king stands up and goes down to the House of God. The singer intones, “... ”
Nabû-mušeṣi, deputy of the chief scribe;
I have seen the moon and the sun together.
... I said to my lord:
... Babylon ...
... they are making
... I have sent ...
... who
Concerning the gold about which the king, my lord, wrote to me,
I told them: "Bring me your servants, so I can send them to me!" They refused to do so.
(As for) the dais of the god Aššur, in its (original) position, it had become old and its foundation had become weak. I removed its dilapidated section(s) by the command of the gods Aššur and Anu. I made (it) two and a half bricks thick. I rebuilt (it) from top to bottom. I made (it) larger than before. I made (it) as bright as daylight. I made (it) as perfect as a mountain. I made (it) as beautiful as a work of art. I made
Witness Nabû-balassu-iqbi, baker.
The money is paid completely. That field, house, threshing floor, orchard, and well are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... of the central city
... eclipse which took place in the evening watch
If the Old Man star comes close to the top of the moon and stands there: the king will exercise complete dominion over his land and have no rival in his land.
... orchard ...
their ... s ...
... Aššur-šarru-uṣur
To the king, my lord: your servant Mannu-ki-Adad. Good health to the king, my lord!
... their ...
Concerning what Bel-iddin said to the king, my lord: "... s to the deputy ... "
Witness NN, 'third man' of the chariotry.
On the 30th day the moon was seen together with the sun: the king of kings will extend the life. The 27th day the moon rebelled and the 28th day the moon and sun were seen together: there will be a revolt and the king of kings will extend the life. The 4th day he extended in the sky: the revolt will be extended. The 4th day he extended the day: he will extend the life.
Ditto, ditto; may they make you like a fly, may they make you like a mosqu, may they make you like a wasp, and may they make you like a scorpion.
to the king, my lord, ...
... persons ...
Month ... , xth day, eponym year of Sagab (651).
... fish ...
Seal of Bur-... ,
Nabû-balassu-iqbi,
... , ... ,
How could they (= the gods) abandon me? How could they abandon me? When the river of the Inner City had become too small,
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... the Gambuleans, newcomers
The architect ...
2 ditto — Babaya, ... , ...
... the gods ... , Ḫaya, ...
Remanni-Issar has gone to Kar-Aššur and stayed there.
Enlil-nārārī, king of the four quarters (of the world), the one who provides for Eridu, the one who renovates Ekur, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of the Enlil of the gods, the one who provides for the cult centers, the one who provides abundantly for the sanctuaries, am I:
... entered ... and was killed.
Disregard that ... may occur to the heart of the troops ...
... the camp ...
Your servant, the šandabakku. I would gladly die for the king, my lord! May Enlil, Ninurta and Nusku bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
If the moon becomes visible in Sivan (III) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
Witness Nabû-na'id, palace farmer.
The man who removes the earrings of the gods, in the evening,
Sanini, who ... , has paid the son of Sadir 1 1/2 minas of gold for ... , and has taken 50 ... from him. He has given ... to NN.
Now, they have made a golden statue of the goddess Ningal, the exalted one, the beloved of the goddess Ištar, the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the
If the moon and sun are in opposition: the king of the land will widen his understanding.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mulliltu bless the king, my lord!
... and in the name of the king who does not know the god Marduk, king of Babylon, ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
I conquered the lands Sallat and Lulume in their entirety and the land Alzu.
... is well.
... the fort ...
Remuttu, ... of the king, ...
Witness Šumma-ilani.
1 prayer bowl ditto;
Moreover, Ṣidqâ, the king of the city Ashkelon who had not bowed down to my yoke, abandoned the gods of his father’s house, together with his (own) possessions, and set out for Assyria.
... of the Li'tamu ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your great divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
Now then, I have sent Nabû-eṭir, my messenger, to the Palace to greet my father. If he does not come, I shall send a sealed document to the Palace.
(and whether) he will return alive and safely, and set out on the road to his destination.
5 talents, the New Palace of Calah;
I set Bel-ibni, son of the chief builder, an expert in the craft of the gods Nanāya and Adad, loose in my palace. I made him rule over the land of Sumer and Akkad.
1 ditto of linen, of Nabû-ahhe-eriba, the delegate of Tyre;
Month Iyyar (II), 10th day, eponym year of Zazaya, governor of Arpad.
(As for) the Cimmerians, who had not come to the aid of my father and my family, they saw the might of (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar, my lords, in battle and fear fell upon them. They brought about the defeat of their settlements (and) they fled to me.
On my third campaign, I marched against Ahērū, the king of the land Mannea. (viii 10') By the command of the gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, (and) Nergal, I entered the land Mannea and I conquered (and) plundered (it). I carried off to Assyria (viii 15') its heavy booty,
... will be placed.
Month of the god Sîn, first day, eponym year of Ša-Adad-nīnu.
Witness Bel-abu'a.
La-... , ... of Šepe-... , has contracted and bought him for 40 ...
7 big loaves;
which are in the river, of the house of Uargite, have been killed. 370 have been captured.
shall place 10 minas of refined silver and one mina of pure gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
At that time, the temple of the god Aššur, my lord, which a prince who preceded me had built, had become old and dilapidated. I removed its dilapidated section(s) by the command of the god Aššur, my lord, and (then) I rebuilt it from top to bottom. I made it larger than the one in the days of the past. I built a new courtyard in front of the gate of the god Nunnamnir and a new courtyard in front of the gate of the god Nunnamnir and (then
... the Babylonians ...
The singer washes his hands, performs a sheep offering, and returns the cupbearer. He swings the purification device, pours out a libation bowl, and pours out a libation bowl.
Iqisu,
Let him come ...
Witness NN, royal bodyguard.
I am Mullissu ...
... the gods of the king. If ... , the king ...
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur, eunuch.
Concerning what the king, my lord, said: "... on the 10th, 11th, 15th and ... th day to ... " —
May your orchards be filled with fruit! ...
Adad-apla-iddina, son of Anat-kina, king of Babylon, the one who renovates Esagil, the one who provides for the cult centers, the one who provides for the cult centers, the one who provides for the cult centers, the king who provides for the cult centers.
The king, my lord, should not say: "He did not provide the food."
On the 16th day, Abi-rahâ came and brought us the tribute. On the 17th day, we set out from Malak and went to Adian. Šamaš of ...
... they became frightened ... they captured the man ... they carried off my horses, ... they cut off my weapons, ... they plundered my army, ... they made a servant of his.
Witness NN.
In the future may a later prince, when that wall becomes old and dilapidated, restore it. May he restore my inscribed name and my inscribed name to its place. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-aplu-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan).
Concerning the saplings about which the king, my lord, wrote to me, they are still alive. They were brought to Dur-Šarrukin, but they have not yet come in. I shall send (word) and they will come in.
Bir-ramman ...
The merchant from Carchemish, his servants, have not been able to bring the slaves of Mullissu and the Lady of Kidmuri, the mothers who were sold to me.
I had an inscribed object made and had all the mighty victories that I achieved over all of my enemies with the support of (the god) Aššur, the great lord, my lord, and all of the (other) achievements that I had achieved written thereon. I deposited (it) in the foundation(s) of the palace, my lordly residence.
Seal of Nabû-eriba, scribe.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
"Greatness," "grandness," "chief eunuch," "...
x ditto of refined oil; 3 seahs of chick-peas; 3 'litres' of lentils;
2,000 ... ,
The king, my lord, has entrusted Šumma-ilu, son of Ara-rāpi, the recruitment officer of the king, to me.
a filament,
The wild ass which Enlil created, the wild bull which Anu and Enlil created, the herds of wild animals which the lord of the steppe created:
Mannu-ki-... ,
their bull, their harvest ...
... he has twice ... ed his eyes.
... his face
The best of health to my lord!
The land of the king is well; the fort is well. The king, my lord, can be glad.
... you will conquer ...
Sargon (II),
... son of Anu
Monument of Sîn, his brothers, king of the universe, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned the image of Aššur, the Anunnaki, Sîn, Šamaš, Adad, (and) Ištar of Bīt-Kidmuri, the one who fashioned the image of Aššur, his lord, (and) the one who built the statue of Aššur, his lord.
In the orchard of the house of Kar-Nergal, in the courtyard, in the courtyard, in the courtyard, in the courtyard, in the courtyard, in the courtyard, in the courtyard, in the courtyard, in the courtyard, in the courtyard, in the courtyard, in the courtyard, in the courtyard, in the courtyard, in the courtyard, in the courtyard, in the courtyard, in the courtyard, in the courtyard, in the courtyard, in the courtyard, in the courtyard, in the cour
Mannu-ki-Arbail, the ... , and the scribes ... who went ... , have returned and reported back:
Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, viceroy of Ur, son of Ningal-iddin, viceroy of Ur, built Eašankur, the new temple of the goddess Ninkura.
I tore down that small palace in its entirety. I diverted the course of the Tebilti River from the center of the city and directed its outflow into the meadow behind the city.
... the king, my lord
Witness Kimamaya.
Witness Abdi-Daddi, chief of the quay.
A tablet of NN to the king, his lord: "To the king, my lord:
The 'weapon'-mark of the 'increment' rises to the left...
Month Nisan (I), eponym year of Eṭir-Marduk.
... they have said ...
Now, the king, my lord, should send a letter to Il-yada' concerning the review. And I myself should come and speak with him. He has been plotting with the other (king) and the king should know (this).
Witness U...
20 ditto, each 1 cubit (50 cm) long, placed in a row;
Witness ... -Nabû.
Concerning the star of the king, our lord, about which the king, our lord, wrote to us, there is no sign associated with it. The star of Taurus is faint, it has not yet ascended.
(whether) after he has planned and made up his mind to go, the gods Aššur (and) Adad will let him live and he will return alive and safely to his place of origin.
... of Šumma-ilani, at the disposal of Ninuayu.
1 seah 1 'litre' of spiced bread; a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your great divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
... for seed corn
... , Enuma Anu Enlil,
Palace of Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines, the one who reveres the gods Sîn, Šamaš, Adad, (and) Ištar, the one who loves the kingship of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines, the one who reveres the gods Aššur and Marduk, (and) the one who fashioned my royal image in Nineveh.
... years
... the palace herald
Disregard that they speak with (their) mouths, or think it, but do not say it...
... to Nabû'a
Ever since Mukin-zeri set up camp against me, I have been living under the protection of the king.
I put their magnates, together with Nabû-šuma-iškun, the son of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), who had fled to me on chariots, in gold bracelets, gold rings, gold earrings, and gold braid, and I fastened (them) around their wrists. I imposed upon them corvée labor in perpetuity.
an estate of 1 hectare ... lu... ;
... he has become frightened ...
... of the king I do not know. I do not ...
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
Bel and Nabû ...
I have seen ... ; you ...
an estate of 3 decares adjoining Lubâ, adjoining the field of Ahi-qamu,
May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May Aššur, Bel and Nabû give happiness and physical well-being to the king, my lord!
Witness Šarru-pa-lu-dari, royal bodyguard.
The king, my lord, ... the servants of the king, my lord, and strengthened him.
Ashur-kenu-ubasha,
He (the god Marduk) commanded me and I built a new house, a replica of the house of the goddess Ištar, my lady, which is inside the city Arbela, the city of the festival of abundance, the house of the goddess Ištar, my lady, which ... had been demolished, (and) which ... in order to appease the heart of the god Marduk, the great lord of ... who had not been built in the days of the past, (and) to provide for the needs of the great horses of ... which ... who had been killed by
If the moon becomes visible in Nisan (I) on the 30th day: dispersal of the army.
... Urmanu-nunu ...
... on account of the words of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, and Assurbanipal, the crown prince of the Succession Palace,
Witness Suhuru.
The chief haruspex of the Urarṭian, who is in the service of the governor of Calah, is in Arbela. They say: "He is there." What is it that the king, my lord, commands?
I will send ...
I will speak favorable things about him to the king, my lord.
Concerning those men, I have not heard anything about them. If they have killed them, or if they have captured them,
Witness Zarutî, chariot driver of the crown prince.
... my eyes
Witness Sin-uballiṭ, ...
Fingernail of Zer-sama', owner of the field, garden, threshing floor and house being sold.
... have been brought in today.
If Scorpius comes close to the front of the moon and stands there: the king will exercise complete dominion over his enemy.
I built a palace of elephant ivory, ebony, boxwood, musukannu-wood, cedar, cypress, juniper, and terebinth, for my royal residence. I brought in the god Aššur, the great lord, and the gods living in Assyria by means of the craft of the god Kullu and I made (them) take up residence in it. I made splendid offerings and presented my gift(s) to them. I made the processional way of the camp which leads to my lordly residence radiant like daylight
not yet ...
... river
... before the gate of ...
in all, a house of 2 ... , x camels in cultivation in the town of Samanu.
Does your great divinity know it? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Witness Ilumma-le'i, cohort commander.
... the seat of the god Sîn, which is inside Baltil (Aššur), ... the seat of the god Sîn, which is inside Nineveh, ... the seat of the god Sîn, which is inside the temple of the god Ea, the creation of the hands of the god Sîn, the god Nabû, and the god Marduk, the goddess Ninsaggirgi and the god Mar-biti-ilani, the gods who dwell there, ... I completed.
If the earth quakes all day: dispersal of the land.
The 'station' is present. The 'path' on the left ...
they will go ...
... who ...
... Babylon ...
From Nabû-belu-ka''in.
The silver which the prefects of the village managers collected from the people of the country, two talents and 18 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish, half a shekel of gold, two togas, three tunics, and three robes, at the disposal of my messenger, I have sent to the king.
(As for) Ḫanūnu (Ḫanūnu), the city Ḫabṣat, he became frightened by my mighty weapons and fled to the land Muṣru. I conquered the city Ḫabṣat, his royal city, ... I carried off ... , gold, 800 talents of silver, (and) people, together with their possessions, his family, (and) his property. I carried off his gods.
x+20 hectares of field in the village of Abi-... ,
From Zakir.
Shalmaneser, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II), strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Šamšī-Adad (IV) (who was) also strong king, king of the universe, and king of Assyria:
... ;
or the king, or an official appointed by the king, or the commander-in-chief of the army, or the army itself, or the god Aššur, the god Adad, the god Ber, the god Enlil of Assyria, the god Ištar of Assyria, or the prince who provides for you,
... Aššur-ila'i
Witness Putaya.
I cut down beams of cedar and cypress and threw (them) into the river.
If the moon becomes visible on the 30th day: frost; there will be rumor of the enemy.
Witness Nuranu. Danaya. Ur...
Afterwards, ... , who ... to the death of Nabû-eṭir and NN,
x+16 courses of brick, ...
Month Adar (XII), 10th day, eponym year of Mar-larim.
On the 18th day the king goes down to the House of God. The chanter takes the king's hand in the gate of the Anunnaki.
adjoining ...
... Babylon, which ...
or Muqalli-... ,
Witness Su-Adad.
Ditto by all the gods of Arbela!
By the command of the god Adad, my beloved, I marched to Mount Lebanon. I cut down cedar beams for the temple of the gods Anu and Adad, the great gods, my lords. I cut down cedar beams for the temple of the god Amberu, the mountain of the gods, ...
6 oxen ...
... the gods ... upon him
... his ...
adjoining the field of Nabû-duru-uṣur,
care of Kiṣir-Aššur, exorcist of the House of Aššur.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. Good health to the king, my lord!
If in Shebat (XI) there is an earthquake: attack of the enemy.
One mina without a central (weight).
To the king, my lord: your servant Babu-šumu-iddina, of Calah. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
from Til-...
If a planet becomes visible in Elul (VI): the harvest of the land will be brought in, and the god will have mercy on the land.
At that time, the temple of the god Enlil, lord of the lands, my lord, which a former king had built, had become old and dilapidated. I removed its dilapidated sections and rebuilt it. I made its structure larger than the one in the days of the past. I completed it from top to bottom. I made it shine like daylight and made (it) an object of wonder. I made (it) an object of wonder for the people of the land.
Gurini;
I erected a statue of the mother who gave birth to me, the great mother of heaven and earth, the creator of all people, the one who fashioned the features of the gods, the one who loves my priesthood, the one who provides for the cult centers of the gods, the one who loves my kingship.
I shall see and ... the ... , the Akkadian polyptychs, the ... polyptychs of Aššur, and the tablets, and I shall write to you.
... to ...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the troops and horses of the magnates of Bet-kari and the tribute of Sattadia should go to the campaign against the horses of ...
From Su...
deputy, his right hand man,
If the earth quakes at night: worry for the land.
I am the one who is assiduous towards their shrines, the one who reveres their great divinity, the one who is attentive to their will, the one who is assiduous towards their shrines, the one who reveres their great divinity, the one who is attentive to their will, the one who is assiduous towards their shrines, the one who reveres their great divinity, the one who is assiduous towards their shrines, the one who reveres their great divinity, the one who is assiduous towards their shrines, the one who rever
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... news of the land of Dadda
I brought out the fifth-ranking (officials) and his men, who had come to (the city) Ursaṣu to greet his royal majesty, and I counted (them) as booty. I brought out large blocks of alabaster, elephant ivory, ebony, boxwood, musukannu-wood, (and) elephant ivory, together with his palace women, his palace attendants, male singers, female singers, (and) his palace attendants, and I brought (them) into Nineveh, my capital city, before
... the magnates
at the disposal of Nabû-zeru-ka''in, mayor of Nineveh.
Your servant Ana-Nabû-taklak: I would gladly die for the king of the universe, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: the land and the servants of the king are well. The watch of the king is very strict.
Witness Ahunu.
I marched to the city Madaktu, his royal city. In a favorable month, I set out and took the road. The gods of heaven and earth, and the Lady of the reed marsh, were present with me and protected me on the road. I entered Nineveh in peace.
Witness Nabû-ahu-uṣur, scribe.
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me, I am doing my best. The king, my lord, can be glad.
He made two pairs of sandals of red wool (and) placed (them) in the sanctuary. He provided for his seed.
If the gall bladder is flattened and lies in the cystic duct: the land will experience misfortune.
in all, 4 men, deportees.
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-alik-pani. Good health to the king, my lord!
He came to Barhalza, and ... in the hands of a messenger.
If Adad thunders on the day of disappearance of the moon: ...
Month Tishri (VII), 22nd day, eponym year of Ninurta-nādin-apli, governor of Nineveh.
There are some servants of the chief cupbearer who have taken my orchards, and I have removed my people and settled them there. The people have run away from me and gone to the king. Let the king appoint a guard with me so I can go and bring them in.
in all 5 persons, deportees, with silver rings.
You shall not make common cause with the troops which are plotting insurrection and rebellion against Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, and his brothers, sons of his mother, but shall come to the aid of Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, and his brothers, sons of his mother.
May they cause you, your women, your brothers, your sons and your daughters to be like a fly, like a ... ,
Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
I myself took the lead and went before him. I sat in a secure position on the throne, and he saw the terror of my attack. He fled alone like a bird and ascended a rugged mountain. He (then) returned and sat in a fortress.
11 1/2 shekels of silver for ... , ... of the bath ... ;
May they grant to Aššur-etel-ilāni, the one who reveres him, long days, happiness, and good health; may they make him attain his desire; may they make him attain his wish; may they make him attain his heart's desire; may they make him attain his heart's wish;
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
... Hal-il
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial audience gift from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
Now then, ...
... ;
The ... s of silver ...
11 shekels of silver, of ... ;
The crown prince will be killed by a snake in the king's reign.
Total x; 1 house.
1 ditto,
If the moon makes an eclipse in Tishri (VII) in the evening watch: attack of a ruler, variant: abandonment of a fort.
Remuttu,
I captured a man from among the Medes. He said: "I have returned to my land ... "
... , sons of Yakin
... I laid its foundation pit. I made its brickwork as firm as a mountain. I enlarged its site to forty-nine bricks on (its) longer side (and) thirty-nine bricks on (its) shorter side. I raised its superstructure in three courses of brick. I completed (it) from top to bottom. I filled (it) with splendor (and) made (it) shine like daylight.
I stood with my bodyguard, with my merciless warfare, and with my battle troops. I surrounded them like a wall. I cut off their escape route. I stood on the mountain peak, looking at them. They saw the terrifying splendour of my battle array and became frightened. They flew away alone like bats (living) in crevices. They climbed up the mountain like goats. They stood there, (viii 5') waiting for me to go after them.
You shall not sin against Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, nor make common cause with anyone who sins against him. You shall not make common cause with anyone who sins against the gods and the goddesses.
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
2 minas, of Nabû'a, goldsmith.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
his son of 3 spans,
Instead of their seals they impressed their fingernails.
(Guaranteed against) seizures for 100 days (and against) fraud forever.
Ditto by Anu, the Great Gods, Šalimtu, Šilimtu, Kusu, the Enlil of the sky, Adad, Šala, Tariba, Šerua, Ninurta, the Image, Girru, the Image, Ninurta of the Image, Girru of the Image, the Image of the Image, the Image of the Image, the Image of the Image, the Image of the Image, the Image of the Image, the Image of the Image, the Image of the Image, the Image of the Image, the Image of the Image, the Image
(As for) Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, prince who reveres him, who (was) appointed by the command of (the god) Aššur, the father who had engendered me, (and) who was attentive to the great command(s) of (the god) Aššur, he (Assurbanipal) made the foundation(s) of the throne of Teumman, king of the land Elam, firm like a mountain.
in Ab (V) ...
Dannaya, reporter.
Deputy chief of the accounts.
... Kiṣir-Bel ...
This is the ... which I have been sending you.
... in Adar (XII), 22nd day ...
The 27th day of Tammuz (IV) ... the 28th day ...
... he has returned
Silim-Aššur has contracted and bought him for 30 shekels of silver.
... the king ...
Concerning what my messenger wrote to the king, my lord:
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
I shall remove the 'kettle'-mark and the 'base of the throne' and bring them to the king.
x hundred sheep,
The king wrote to me: "I have sent 226 heavy beams of the king's palace to the house of the king's ... , 110 to the house of the king's ... , and 900 to the palace of the city of the king's palace."
... , ... li,
(whether) he will plot insurrection and rebellion against Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, (or) act with evil intent against him,
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... Arrapha ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
NN has contracted and bought from Mušallim-...
They were in Calah on the 16th day. They did the work, but they did not finish it.
To the king, my lord: your servant Issar-nadin-apli, the foreman of the scribes of Arbela. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû, Marduk and Ištar of Arbela bless the king, my lord!
9 towns ...
Witness Nabû-...
Ashur-da''inanni, king of ...
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
Monument of Naqīʾa, ...
If it is agreeable to the king, my lord, let the king not forsake me.
8 beams ... , which are in ... , for ...
x ... , 10 ... -garments,
This from before Aššur.
Concerning the well in between the well and the great well, in Tammuz (IV) one day, when the water in the well had become scarce, I myself went down and filled the well. But it was not (yet) time to fill the well.
When the king gave the order, Nabû-šumu-iškun and Ṣilaya went and brought him to me, saying: "The king's country is against you, why did you come to Urda-Mullissi?"
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: good for Akkad, bad for Elam and the Westland.
Month Iyyar (II), xth day, eponym year of NN, governor of ...
... his ...
... he will make the dead rise
... which I saw
Of ... the priests of the House of the Cooks.
by my command ...
Witness Kar-... , ...
x farmers, 1 shepherd, x+1064.
If there is an eclipse in Sivan (III) on the 14th day: the god will stand in his position; three gods will be seen together; four will be seen together; the watch of the god will be kept; the middle watch will be kept; there will be two eclipses in the morning watch; the king of Ur will die; there will be deaths in Ur and in the king's family; the son of the king will abandon his position; the throne will be overthrown.
... they will conquer their territory.
Let them write to me what he says.
... their threshing floors
At that time, the shrine of the goddess Ištar, lady of the lands, mistress of his (Šamaš’s), was in ruins. I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I rebuilt Eanna, the temple of the goddess Nanāya, mistress of his (Šamaš’s), and completed (it). I seated (again) the army of his lord (Šamaš) in it.
Witness Mannu-ki-ilu. Witness Husu, ditto.
Aplaya,
Marduk-apla-iddina, son of Yakin,
I decorated Emašmaš, the temple of the Lady of the Universe, with silver (and) gold.
After Teumman had fled, Urtaku sat on the throne of Teumman. He, like the sons of Teumman and Ummanaldašu, did not respect the oath (sworn) by Urtaku and he committed a crime against Ummanaldašu. Ummanaldašu, Ummanappu, Tammaritu, sons of Urtaku, the king of the land Elam, Kudurru, Parrû, sons of Ummanaldašu, the king who came before Urtaku, and 60 members of the royal
Witness Libî.
Bel-dan.
4 sheep ... ;
x ... , x ... ,
He pours out a libation bowl, ... , and pours out a libation bowl of wine, and ... He offers hand-water, saying: “Make the seed of his name disappear, make his name and his seed disappear from the land.”
Sippar, Nippur, Babylon, and Borsippa ...
In the city Turušpâ, his (Šamaš’s) city, I captured him (Šamaš) alive and brought him before the gates of his city. I bound the image of my royal majesty on the neck of Turušpâ.
Witness NN, ša šēpi guard.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
Ashurnasirpal, king of Assyria, the one who is appointed by the gods Aššur and Adad, the one who is loved by the gods Anu and Ninurta, the one who is praised by the gods Ištar and Ningal, the one who is feared by the gods Anu and Ninurta, the one who is revered by the gods Adad and Šala, the one who is loved by the gods Ea and Belet-ili, the one who is praised by the gods Aššur and Ninurta, the one who is revered
Disregard that a woman has written and placed it before you...
Witness Aššur-aplu-iddina. Witness Ubru-na'id, porter.
... ;
I fastened bands of silver and bronze on doors of cedar, cypress, juniper, and Indian wood and I installed (them) in their gates. I fastened bands of silver and bronze on doors of elephant ivory, ebony, boxwood, (and) musukannu-wood and I installed (them) in their gates. I fastened bands of silver and bronze on doors of elephant ivory, ebony, boxwood, (and) elephant hide and I installed (them) in their gates.
The 26th day: joy of heart.
30 ditto, at the disposal of ... ,
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhe, recruit.
x ... , seed corn in the care of NN;
In my anger, I plundered the Inner City (Babylon). I carried off to Assyria the people of Babylon, the archers, the (tribal) troops, the elders, the nobles, the officials, (and) the palace personnel, and Nergal-naṣir, together with the citizens of the city. I counted (them) as booty.
Inspected  Missing
5 minas of silver by the (mina) of Carchemish, belonging to Nergal-šarru-uṣur, at the disposal of Nabû-šumu-iddina, son of Nabû-ra'im-ketti, scribe of the governor of Dur-Šarruken.
“... Ištar ...
Mannu-ki-Ninua,
6 bags of (mixed) kernels.
Ashur-dan (III),
Written and collated according to its original.
Nabû-ušabši ...
Total: 3 seahs of bread, 1 seah 8 'litres' of beer.
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Dari-abu'a or his sons or grandsons or brothers or nephews, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Tabni-Issar, his sons and grandsons, shall pay two minas of silver.
(As to) the letter which Ardâ sent to Sasî, the city overseer, Ištar-nadin-apli, the scribe, said: "This letter ... Sasî ... to you. Why did he send it to you? Why did he not send it to me?"
Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, marched in the mountains of the enemy land, where there was no water, no food, no grass, no trees, no people. He pitched his camp in a place without water, where there was no food, no grass, no trees, no people. He pitched his camp in a place where there was no water, no food, no grass, no trees, no people. He pitched his camp in a place where there was no water, no food, no grass, no trees, no people.
Total, the 'buyer' of the seed.
To the king, my lord: your servant Kiṣir-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord!
Ninurta-ilaya,
... Calah ...
... the city god
... upon them ...
Egišnugal, “House whose top is lofty”: the house of Ea.
To the god Adad, canal inspector of heaven and earth, whose command is unalterable, whose command is firm, whose word is unchangeable, whose command is unbreakable, whose command is unshakable, whose command is unalterable, whose word is unchangeable, whose command is unbreakable, whose word is unalterable, whose command is unbreakable, whose word is unalterable, whose command is unbreakable, whose word is unalterable, whose command is unbreakable, whose word is unalterable, whose command is unbreakable, whose word is
Concerning what the king wrote to me: "Why did you not see it?" — I myself saw it, but nobody else did. I did not write to the king.
... is placed in ...
And this is the truth. They have made a lie about him and said: "He is a sign. It is not a sign for me, it is a sign for the palace of the king."
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, son of Sennacherib, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), (who was) also king of the world, (and) who from sunrise to sunset, day after day, constantly revered the great gods, the gods of heaven and earth, the goddesses of Nineveh, (and) the
1 woman, young, ... ;
... have been plotting
I have brought in 90 men of the town Isittu and settled them in the town Ezirtu. I have brought in 30 men from the town ... and settled them in ...
with ...
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 21st day, eponym year of Dadî, treasurer.
Now then, the messenger who gave him the letter, saying: "Fear not, go to Nikkal-iddin! Do not fear Esarhaddon, he will put you on the throne and he will make you great!" —
... the divine bull, ... the great lady, ... who ... his reign and made him (the god Marduk) take up residence in it; ... the one who (re)constructed Esagil and Babylon, ... who (re)confirmed sattukku-offering(s) and (re)confirmed sipparu-offering(s) ... who (re)confirmed the regular offerings ... who (re)confirmed the regular offerings ... who (re)confirmed the regular offerings ... who (re)confirmed the regular offerings ... who (re
Of the House of Kar-Tukulti-Ninurta: the king performs the sheep offerings. One ox, six sheep, for Aššur; one sheep, one spring lamb, for the goddess Bēlet-ṣeri; one sheep, one turtledove, for the goddess Bēlet-Dān; three sheep, for the god Dišpat; two sheep, for the god Sîn; of the House of Aššur, two sheep, for the god Šamaš; four sheep, for the god ... ; one sheep, for the
The temples of the king and the king my lord are well. The king, my lord, can be glad.
at the disposal of Ubru-Nabû, ...
Bar-dî has contracted and bought him from Bel-šarru-uṣur for 5 1/2 minas of silver by the mina of the king.
Disregard that an angry man spoke angrily, or that he has changed his mind...
Witness Bel-ṣalli.
Suri-balaṭ, shepherd; 1 son; 1 woman; 188 sheep, in the village of Suri-balaṭ.
The king, my lord, will achieve his desire.
2 ... , the chief ... ;
... the xth day;
The ... servant of Nabû-šallim-ahhe said: "When the king moved from Nineveh to Calah, the eunuchs were delayed on account of the barley. The cupbearer from Calah delayed the barley for two days. He went up to the House of Succession and brought down the golden statue of Erra."
As to what my lord wrote to me: "... this ... , if ... bricks are available, ... will enter there" — if the king comes to Der, I shall send (word) and they will bring the bricks into the city. All the water that is needed for the bricks is in the river.
If Adad shouts on a day without clouds: there will be darkness and famine in the land.
With Bel and Nabû, who give the universe to the king of the lands, my lord, your servants, who are in your hands, who have made the work and not ... , who have done the work for three years and are still doing it, who have done it for three months, and who have been granted it by the king, my lord, — perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "They are in the environs."
Palace of Aššur-iqīša, king of the world, king of Assyria.
May DNN bless the king, my lord.
of the palace ... of Nineveh ...
... I made (them) take the road to the city Ḫazunu. (viii 10') ... I pursued them on the peaks of the mountains and ... I cut off their heads (and) took (them) to my city, Aššur.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your great divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
as ...
I captured the city Elenzaš as a royal city and a fortress for that district, and I named it Kār-Sennacherib.
3 seahs of barley for beer, including those for the divine procession, at the disposal of the brewers.
Future prince who ...
or by means of a breach, or by means of a tunnel, or by means of a rampart, or by means of a door, or by means of a roof-beam, or by means of a window,
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
... and I have sent ...
Iyyar (II), Sivan (III), Tammuz (IV), and Qedar (IV), these five months, the king should know. May the king be glad!
Witness Mutakkil-Marduk, scribe.
... he made his eyes fill
Now, the gods of the king, my lord, have made these Karallaeans sinful against the treaty.
to ...
The ... which is in ...
x minas of silver belonging to Lu-ki-ṣabi, at the disposal of Dannî.
Witness Šulmu-beli. Witness Su'a, from Calah.
and he will die there.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether, (should) Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, appoint him to a position of his choosing, in accordance with the wording of this document, he will return alive and safely, and set foot on Assyrian soil.
If he does not pay, the silver shall increase by 100 percent per homer.
... the fort ...
... who is in charge of the left, is exempt, ... who in the kings, my fathers, ...
We went to the Palace ... and stayed ... ; the ... behind ...
... Hubašana to the palace men ...
If the sun stands in the halo of the moon: there will be truth in the land, variant: the son will speak the truth with his father; universal peace.
... Tattî, and his people.
The gods of the king are well; they are happy in their house.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your great divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty, or (that) the extispicy has become jumbled in the mouth of the performer...
Witness Iddin-Adad-ahhutu, servant of the vizier.
... I shall write to him
shall give 10 minas of silver and one mina of gold, and shall return the money tenfold to its owner. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
He shall pay the money in full.
... , eponym year of Inurta-šarru-uṣur.
... to the watch
If the moon reaches the sun and follows it closely: there will be a flood.
Witness Nabû-šezib.
... fish ...
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
x+7, ... , x+19, ... , x, ... ,
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, ditto.
x ... ,
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The man ...
... we have opened the gate of the pass ...
... what is it that ... many ... ?
x reinforced lower garments ... ;
Harran, Kar-Apladad,
... Nabû in Babylon, and ... he will die in the midst of battle.
Should Assurbanipal, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, appoint him to the priesthood of the temple of Marduk? Should he be made to perform the ... ?
The lackeys have been appointed. One lackey has been appointed to the watch for the month of Tebet (X). If he dies or flees, you shall seize him and bring him to your attention. If he flees, you shall pursue him and catch him. If he comes, you shall seize him and bring him to your attention. If he flees, you shall pursue him and catch him.
Zeru-ukin, Nergal-šarru-uṣur, Hanî,
The people of all the lands are obedient to you, O king, my lord. You ... the temple of the kings, and all the people who are devoted to you are constantly praying to your gods. They are constantly beseeching you, saying: "You are the one who is chosen by Aššur ... the gates ... "
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šarru-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
... have not agreed
... on account of the rebellion ... , the ... , Muqalli-Aššur and NN ...
Let them write me, so I can inform the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should know (this).
they do not give ...
The horses ... are coming.
he has gone ...
These five months, I have been waiting for the news of the king, my lord, and for the lord of lords, Bel and Nabû, until they have made a decision about the city of Kahat.
... in the underworld without ... , without ... , without ...
... 4 ... s
a ditto of quinces;
... I exempted (from taxes) and ... their ...
... to one
3 sons of Nabû-zeru-lešir
Mars became visible in the path of the Enlil stars. It stood at the feet of the Old Man (constellation), and I saw it on the 26th of Iyyar (II). I wrote to the king, my lord, as soon as I observed it.
... sent ...
9 (cuts of) meat, the New Palace;
Because of the construction of my palace, the site of which had become too small and the plan of whose design had become old, at that time, the god Aššur and the goddess Ištar, who love my priesthood, named me for the renovation of that city. (viii 10') During those days, they gave me a command and I made a plan for it. I cut down the cedar trees (and) cypress trees that were growing in the mountains (and) I used (them) in the work required (by my) palace.
The 'station' is present. The 'paths' are 2, the lower one is elevated. The 'well-being' is present...
Irnunu of the land Mannea, a Gutian, who had heard of the mighty deeds that Aššur, my lord, had done in the mountains, and who had come down to Dur-Tukulti-Ninurta, which ... , kissed my feet, ... horses, mules, oxen, and sheep and goats, ...
Half a mina of silver by the royal (mina) belonging to Šamaš-ṭabri, at the disposal of Mannu-aki-Ninua.
... letter
... my ...
I have made my peace with my brother. Why did he seize my feet? You shall not seize my feet! I will go to the territory of my brother.
... who ...
Bar-sipitu wrote to me through the delegate: "Why did you kill ... ?"
May Kulluk, the creator of everything, destroy your name and your seed. May he remove your seed from the land.
... the town of the treasurer
40 ditto, ditto, of the country;
Lu-uṣur, the man from Bit-Hamban, and Ahiqar, the man from Bit-Sin, have come to me, saying: "Come, let us seize all the men who have gone to Bit-Hamban ... , and let us seize all the men who have not gone to Bit-Hamban, and let us appoint you over them."
... ;
4 ditto of barley belonging to Bahianu, at the disposal of La-amašši, owner of the man being sold.
adjoining the house of Luqu ...
I set up garrison troops in the city Kalḫu (and) the city Aššur, (and) I placed eunuchs of mine as provincial governors over them.
x shekels, ditto, ditto, ... ,
Indabibi, who sat on the throne of the land Elam after Tammarītu, saw the might of my weapons which I had brought into the land Elam and fear fell upon him. He sent a message to Nabû-bēl-šumāti, son of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), who had fled to me from the land Mušku, saying: “I will seize you and bring you into my presence.” I sent Indabibi, the king of the land Elam, out of the
12 minas of silver, capital, belonging to Šamaš-abu'a, horse trainer,
The "pouch" of the "little" star is directed towards the "big" star.
The gods who come out of the House of Dagan and go to the House of Dagan:
Tukulti-Ninurta, king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II), king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dān (II) (who was) also king of the universe (and) strong king (and) king of Assyria:
To the king, my lord: your servant Nashir-Bel. Good health to the king, my lord!
... Kalbi-Ukû
Nabû-šakin-šulmi,
6 blankets, a bed ... ,
I engraved on large limestone slabs (images of) the enemy settlements that I had conquered. I surrounded their (the palace rooms’) lower courses (with them and) made (them) an object of wonder. I stationed (them) in the courtyard(s) of the temple of the god Aššur, the great lord, my lord, for the admiration of all of the people. I made (them) an object of wonder. I filled the courtyard(s) with splendor (and) made (them) an object of wonder.
... of the major-domo of the crown prince;
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of Assyria, unrivalled king, shepherd chosen by the great gods, favorite of the gods Anu and Adad, guardian of truth who loves justice, renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the insubmissive, (and) the one who strikes enemies with lightning:
I put to the sword the army of the Arameans (and) Sutians, who live in the city Ḫirimmu. I captured alive the (other) Arameans (and) Sutians, who were not caught in the net. I brought back to Assyria a large hostage, (namely) the commander-in-chief of the enemy.
1 (of) 2 (of) 3 minas ... , with 2 (of) Jupiter ... ,
Bel-dan, palace herald, overseer, son of Bel-dan, herald, son of Bel-dan, herald, son of Bel-dan, herald, son of Bel-dan, herald, son of Bel-dan, herald, son of Bel-dan, herald, son of Bel-dan, herald, son of Bel-dan, herald, son of Bel-dan, herald, son of Bel-dan, herald, son of Bel-dan, herald, son of Bel-dan, herald, son of Bel-dan, herald,
Should he act according to this document?
I built the Avosatua, which is in the palace of my lordly majesty, which is opposite the ziggurrat, and which is over the whole extent of the city of Aššur, (and) which has twelve gates, from the gate of the ziggurrat to the gate of the Tigris River. I fastened bands of bronze on doors of cedar, cypress, juniper, (and) Indian wood and I installed (them) in their gates. I fastened bands of bronze on doors of cedar, cypress, juniper, (and
I have finished the fortress, but I have not yet received the king's order.
Amat-šumu-iškun,
If in Nisan (I) his position is stable: the prince's land will revolt against him.
The 'outside' rides upon the 'cap'...
... the goddess Gula, who ...
Concerning what you wrote to me through the envoys of your country:
... Ištaran
to ...
The king has heard ...
To the 'farmer,' our lord: your servants Adad-šumu-uṣur and Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health to our lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless our lord!
... ;
From Ašaredu.
Witness Balasî.
The king, my lord, said: "Let them return the barley, and let them give me 40,000 (homers) of it until I come."
(and whether) ... -ramu will bring 10 talents of silver and ... the city Ušdi, and whether he will ... much more.
I have ...
In the future, in far-off days, may one of the descendants of Aššur, the heir of Ešarra, restore it. May he find an inscribed object bearing my name, anoint (it) with oil, make an offering, (and) return (it) to its place. (Then) may the god Aššur will (once again) hear his prayers.
... the deportees ...
Witness Adad-aplu-iddina.
... are full
x litres of honey ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
I had a wall built anew against the enemy. I raised its top 45 courses of brick. I filled in the moat 40 courses of brick. I made its base as firm as a mountain. I built (it) from top to bottom with large limestone slabs.
... Il-yada' ...
... let the king ask him.
In the middle of the sun which shone, Adad thundered in the east, and the sun shone in the west.
... their ... have gone ...
At that time, the land of the Hittites, which had rebelled against me, ...
in all x persons, servants of these gentlemen —
saying, "... s to the king, and you shall give ... "
he took ...
Sphinxes of alabaster, as well as sphinxes of cast urudû-copper, whose features are exquisite and whose bodies shine like a brilliant day, (and) sphinxes of cast ... , whose features are exquisite and whose bodies shine like a brilliant day, (and) whose features are perfect, (and) whose bodies are clad in radiance;
... upon ...
... with my stele ...
in Arbela,
... The coils of the colon are 16 in number...
As to what you wrote to me: "The king of Urarṭu and his army are marching against you. What are you doing?" —
This is a propitious month for the whole of the land. The gods have taken up residence in their abodes and are sitting in peace. May Marduk, Nanaya, Uṣur-amāssu, and the gods of Ur, like a writing-board, write in my name a good fate for all the lands in my hands.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-bani-ahhe. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the kings of the land Ḫatti and the kings of the river Bāʾalu, Baʾalu, Udēnu, Munnabītu, Qašpimu, Muṣittu, Ḫazittu, Mētunu, Ikūsu, Ammānu, Usi-Baʾal, Usi-Baʾal, Ubunna, Ikūsu, Ammānu, Bīt-Ammon, Aḫ-milki,
To the king, our lord: your servants Nabû-ra'im-nišešu and Salamanu. Good health to the king, our lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, our lord!
