I marched through the gorges of the Euphrates, difficult terrain, on horseback and had my chariot carried on (men’s) necks. I crossed the Euphrates in baskets (lit. “on baskets and reeds”). I had my entire camp pitched on the other side (of the river).
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
11 shekels of silver of Ištar of Nineveh belonging to Šep-Issar, ...
5 minas 6 shekels of silver for the seal of Ṭab-bet-Issar, at the disposal of Šep-Aššur.
... salt ...
What ...
... Uruk
Now then ...
Total, of the estate of 10 hectares ...
The king, my lord, should give sheep to the gods. If he does not, they will not come down.
Witness Barruqu, chariot driver.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
2 necklace ... ;
Witness Urdu-Nabû, scribe.
... with the men, horses, and army at his disposal, should go ... and ... ?
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
The very best of health to the king, my lord!
... 1 litre 1 'litre' for the flour ...
If its horns are very pointed: the flood will come.
If Nergal wears a helmet which is not ... : the weapons of Nergal will not be raised against him; he will not be able to enter the city, the city will not be under his control.
4 horses from the king of Mannea, in the treasurer's household.
40 hectares of field in the town of Andillu; Sinqi-Issar, farmer, and his people;
Month Adar (XII), 21st day, eponym year of Bel-šarrani, governor of Kurbail.
... -šulmu, ...
Ahu-nagi ...
... he has made him slip
... , ... il-... , Bel-lešir, 3 hectares of arable land, ...
(As for) the one who alters the work of my hands (or) effaces my own representation(s), may the god Sîn, the lord of the lunar disk, glare at him angrily and make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the land!
Ditto by Nabû, Nusku, Uraš and Nergal!
Inurta-ila'i has contracted and bought it from Šer-idri for x minas of silver.
He places a plate before the god, offers cooked meat, burns juniper and quenches it with water. He places a plate before the god, burns juniper and quenches it with water, places it to the left of the bed, burns juniper and quenches it, places it to the left of the bed, offers incense twice, burns juniper and quenches it, places it to the right of the bed, burns juniper and quenches it, places it to the right of the bed, offers incense twice, burns juniper and quenches
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether NN or his sons or grandsons, seeks a lawsuit or litigation against NN, his son, ...
Witness Mannu-ki-Libbali, scribe.
... the upper and the lower part are equal ... the sky, may he make it dark and may he not show the land; and may he make the land dwell in quiet and may he make the city dwell in quiet. May he make the land of the city dwell as if in pastures near the city, and may he make the land of the city dwell as if in pastures near the city.
... Is it pleasing to your great divinity?
If Jupiter becomes steady in the morning: enemy kings will be reconciled.
... Irra-Aššur
x ... -vessels;
10 shekels of silver, capital, belonging to Edu-šallim, at the disposal of Eriba-Adad.
Witness Sakkî, porter.
... the inhabitants of the city Uṣû ... I made enter inside it. (... ) I carried off people, ... , possessions, (... ), the booty of the gods ... the site where the kings, my ancestors, had ruled all of the four quarters (of the world), ... I set up therein ... all of the tribute of the gods ... I brought to Nineveh, my capital city. I imposed upon them annual payment.
This is the word of Aššur: "...
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
The women about whom the king, my lord, spoke — we shall eat them in the storehouses. There are many good ones. If it is acceptable to the king, they should be placed in the storehouses.
... horse ...
(As for) Gugū, the king of the land Lydia, who lives in a remote place, a rugged mountain, (vi 10) whose kingship the gods Bēl (Marduk) and Nabû had not heard about, (and) who had not learned the craft of kingship, at the time of the eclipse, when the darkness fell, he sent his mounted messenger to inquire about my well-being.
Husâ, gardener; 3 sons; 3 women; 4 ... ; 1 hectare of arable land; 1 house; ... ; 1 vineyard in the town of Inurta-Issar, near ... ; a total of Inati.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Witness Šarru-emuranni.
(As for) the rest of his magnates, including Nabû-šumu-iškun, a son of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), who had fled from my battlefield, ... they (the Assyrians) captured them alive.
The money is paid completely.
May Aššur and Ištar bless the king, my lord!
For these two years, the enemy and the enemy's army have not marched against your house. What is it that they are saying now about the servant of his lord's household? I am dying of thirst.
(As for) Uallî, ... , they cut off his head (and) ... They placed Uallî, his son, on his (Uallî’s) throne. They made (the god) Aššur, the goddess Mullissu, ... the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, ... the great gods, my lords, bow down at my feet and they (the gods) made (them) take an oath by their (own) holy mouth(s) to do obeisance to me. Erišinni, his heir, sent
If a planet becomes visible in the month of Inurta: there will be flood and rain.
Bel-ahu-... , chariot owner;
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Bariki or Abail or their sons or grandsons or brothers or nephews or governor, or any relative of theirs, or ... , and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Remanni-Adad, his sons and grandsons,
A tablet of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, to Tammaritu, king of Elam. I am well, you can be glad.
Month Tebet (X), 25th day, eponym year of Dadi-nuri.
I will set out ...
... he ...
2 ... s, the woman ... ;
The word of Arbela is as lofty as heaven.
... ra-himu
Total 4 seahs each.
If the moon and sun are seen together: reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the world will make the throne last long.
... and because of your kindness
The lord, who in his wrath ... ,
Abda, shepherd ... ; NN, ... ; total, x people.
All this is the fault of the king.
... servant of NN
If the sun rises in a cloudbank: three kings will raise their weapons.
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract, whether Asî or his sons or grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Tarhundapî,
If Aššur and Šarur, which stand in the sting of Scorpius, are bright, the weapons of Akkad will be raised. Scorpius is the great lord, Sagittarius is the crown prince.
Afterwards, when Zeru-ukin had made the treaty with Bel-iqiša, son of Bunanu, saying: "... , send me barley and straw ... and letters ... ," Zeru-ukin ...
... is overturned. The top of the lung is split...
x, governors;
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me,
Witness Nabû-...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Arbayu or his brothers or his nephews or any relative of his, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Ninuayu and his brothers,
all is well ...
60 hectares of field in Dur-Nanaya; Dadî, farmer, and his people;
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šarru-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! The land of the king my lord is well.
I gave orders: "Let ...
... the king, my lord, ...
If on the 15th day the moon and sun are seen together: a strong enemy will raise his weapons against the land; the enemy will tear down the city gates.
Witness Se'-imme.
My enemies have plundered my father's house, and they have robbed me of flesh. They have put a yoke on me.
saying: "To the king, my lord: the bread of the temples is excellent, and the offerings of the temples are excellent. The temples of the king, my lord, are well. May Uraš and Belet-ili daily bless the life of the king, my lord."
... the aegis
Witness Aplaya, ...
in the morning ...
Just as a female kid gives birth to male kids, so may you give birth to male and female children.
(Property) of Yabâ, queen of Tiglath-pileser (III), king of Assyria.
They shall contest in their lawsuit and not succeed.
Esarhaddon, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, appointee of the god Enlil, priest of the god Aššur, ... governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, ... favorite of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, great queen, beloved of the goddess Ištar of Arbela, ... , king of the land of Subartu, the land of the Westland, the land of Gutia, the land of the extensive Hittite land, ... king of the kings
Month Tammuz (IV), ... th day, eponym year of Aššur-duru-uṣur.
Liphur-ilu,
After ...
... 20 ...
... is good
... the Gurabunu ...
Now, when the king says, "...
Three times I marched to the lands Nairi. I conquered the extensive lands Nairi from the land Tummu to the land Daiēnu, the lands Ḫimmu, Paīteru, and Ḫabḫu. I received tribute from the horses (and) mules that they had.
... Aššur-šumu-ka''in
The messenger of the king of Elam has come to me with a letter of the king of Elam. I am herewith sending him to the king, my lord.
My heart was revived, my mind was soothed. I stood up and (then) lifted my hands (in prayer) to the god Enlil, the father of the gods, the god Marduk.
... in the palace
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 7th day, eponym year of Bel-lu-dari, governor of Tillê.
The Tebilti River, a tempestuous flood (of water) which had flowed from distant days by the side of the palace (and) had shaken its base when its flood was in full spate:
Witness Nabû-dur-beliya.
To Sîn-kenu-uṣur:
Belet-ili is placed before him ...
... the singer who is to be praised
I had statues of my royal majesty, which are made of silver, gold, (and) copper, made through the craft of the deities Ninagal, Ninkura, (and) Ninkurra, in order to have (them) constantly bless me before the gods who support me. I set (them) up in their (text: “his”) places of worship. I made the great gods who reside in heaven (and) netherworld rejoice greatly (and) constantly bless me.
of the people of my country ...
Now then I am sending you ... and ...
The king knows that we are not guilty. And we are not to be blamed for the fact that he has been killed. Let the king appoint a man in his place, and let him appoint a bodyguard over his servant's house. Let him give us the bread and the wine which he gave him.
... him and
In the left side of the 'finger' there is a hole. The lower part is elevated...
From the beginning of my reign until my seventeenth palû, I defeated all together the Ituʾu, Ruʾuʾu, Ḫamarānu, Luḫuʾu, Nabatu, Ḫindaru, Ruʾuʾu, (and) Liʾtaʾu, as many as there were on the banks of the Tigris, Euphrates, and Zab Rivers, and (on the banks of) the Ulāya River, which is upstream from Assyria. I placed a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over them
Witness Tabalayu.
May the throne be stable! Say to the enemies of the king, my lord:
NN, gate-guard;
The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
Concerning the ... about which Pan-Aššur-... said, I have seen 32 ... s. Those ...
Aplaya has contracted and bought them from them.
... before Marduk, the governor
I was afraid of death, I did not advance into battle (but rather) turned back. The great gods, the gods of battle, looked at me with fury and commanded me to wage war. They ordered me to go forth and to kill my enemies. I was afraid of death, I did not advance into battle.
Witness Mannu-...
Monument of Aššur-mudammiq, governor of the city Aššur, who ... the greatness of Aššur-rēša-iši, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dān (I) (who was) also king of Assyria. Monument of the governor of the city Aššur.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. The very best of health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May Aššur, Bel, Nabû, Sin, Šamaš, Ninurta and Nergal guard the life of the king, my lord!
Afterwards, Uaiteʾ (Iautaʾ), his son, sat on his (Uaiteʾ’s) throne. He saw the might of the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk) and Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Nusku, (and) Nergal, the great gods, my lords, and bowed down to my yoke. He sent Erisinni, his heir designate, to
The 'finger' is present. The 'omens' from before Ištar are ...
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 9th day, eponym year of Labasi, chief of trade (657).
I shall tell it to him, and he will listen.
The Sumerian (king) sent his messenger to inquire about my well-being. He sent (him) to greet me. He sent his messenger to me to do obeisance. He sent his messenger to me to inquire about the health of (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar. He sent his messenger to me to inquire about the well-being of his enemy. He sent his messenger to me to inquire about his own life. He sent his messenger to me to inquire about the well-being of his enemy. He
The king, my lord, received the magnates whom the king had sent to the treasurer, saying: "... "
The captives who came are ...
The king, my lord, should have a look at the ...
Seal of A... ,
I had a canopy of musukkannu-wood, a durable wood, which is clad with silver, (vi 10) installed over them. I had its perimeter decorated with thirty-four talents (and) twenty minas of red gold (and) I made (it) shine like the sun. I had the figure of the god Marduk, the great lord, (vi 15) his helper, skillfully made and I set (it) up for him.
1, Nabû-šarru-uṣur, governor of Nineveh;
... the fine ...
the women of Cutha ...
8 hectares, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto;
The king is very well indeed; he has recovered completely. He has turned his attention to the neck. He will be completely well in a month's time.
x minas of silver
... to Damascus
Witness NN.
I wrote an inscribed object bearing my name and the praise of my heroism and I placed (it) with him (Ninurta-mukin-nishi). I wrote on it the praise of my royal majesty (and) the deeds that I had done (and) I set (it) up for all time. I wrote on it the praise of the god Bēl (Marduk) and the goddess Zarpanītu and I set (it) up for all time.
The flood which came was very strong. The king my lord should see the damage it has caused.
... these
We have finished the work assignment which was given to the king, my lord, and have made the foundation as firm as a mountain. We have inspected it and there is nothing wrong.
If the moon at its appearance wears a crown: the king will reach the highest rank; the land will dwell as if in pastures near the city.
Now then Hutadia, the ... , has taken his silver, gold, precious stones, and all his possessions, as well as the silver and copper utensils which I gave to Aššur-ili-muballissu, and has run away to the land of the Guti. I am herewith sending him to the king, my lord.
in the charge of Ahabû, commander-of-fifty ... , Akkullanu,
... people
Good health to the king, my lord!
The Pleiades will come close to the Crescent ... Venus in the Pleiades.
... I have been sent
Witness Kubu-Aya.
12 shields of silver, whose bosses are decorated with the head(s) of lion and wild bull, (and) whose edges are inlaid with ... ;
As to the news of the district of the city Nargi, they have said to Kibibi and Dusku: "The king of Ellipi has given the district to Marduk-šarru-uṣur." They have said: "If you give the city, we shall kill the rest of the people." I said to him as follows: "I shall not give it to you in the presence of the people of the country."
(As for) Ummanaldašu (Ḫumban-ḫaltaš III), he fled naked and took to the mountain(s). I pursued him and defeated him. I brought him before my messenger and (then) I gave him the following order: “Go to the aid of Šamaš-šumu-ukin, your brother, who has gone to the aid of the land Elam against you.”
Witness Marduk-šarru-ibni, cohort commander.
1 house; 1/2 threshing-floor ...
2 tureens of bouillon;
an estate of 2 hectares of land adjoining the street and the town of Bit-Amukani;
Adad-bani-...
3 cooking pots of copper, of 1 seah (c. 100 litres) each;
Month ... , 19th day, eponym year of Marduk-šarru-uṣur.
Bel-uballiṭ, NN, ... kinnu, his adolescent son, 2 daughters, a total of 5 persons —
Aššur-nadin-šumi
Lions on the river bank.
With the support of my great divinity, which I had made great,
... Now then I have come
The base of the middle 'finger' of the lung is 'bound.'
They are free from encumbrances. The chief singer has the usufruct of the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ...
10 ... ;
What is it that he/they are plotting?
Nabû-šumu-iddina ...
... me, the Aramean ...
The king's word to the commander-in-chief:
You set up a rikshaw, a portable censer, and a torch, and bring it to the guard.
I had a stele made and I engraved on it the image(s) of the gods (and) I erected (it) for the gods, my helpers.
Witness Nabû'a.
Witness Šep-...
Witness NN. Witness Ahatâ.
adjoining a street
... x cubits wide, adjoining
In Iyyar (II), on the 26th day, the royal bodyguard came in.
Adad-le'i, prefect;
in ...
Witness ... -Adad, ...
A tablet of Bel-aha-iddina to Iddin-ahi, his father. Good health to my father! May Šamaš give you long days!
He (the god Marduk) commanded me to kill, plunder, (and) loot the enemy.
Concerning the statues of the kings which are in Harran about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "The month is good, the day is good, when it enters there, it will be well" — ... for the offerings of the month ...
This is what ...
Afterwards ... , when you came ... , he ... ed you ... , saying: "Come ...
In one ...
... I have been ill
I cut down the trees of the city Ashkelon, which were their stronghold, (and) I piled up their debris in heaps. I entered the city Ashkelon and killed the chieftains, the nobles, (and) the elders, who had brought me out of the land Bīt-Adini. I hung their corpses on poles, (and) placed (them) around the city, the city Ashkelon. I brought out the chieftains, the nobles, (and) the elders, the property of the city Ashkelon,
(As for) Nabû-šuma-ēreš, the šandabakku (governor of Nippur) who did not honor (my) treaty, he suffered from dropsy, (that is) “full water.”
... of Ninurta ...
100 hectares of land ...
... one baker ... to the king about the chief eunuch ... Daniya and Bel-... have said, and ...
Witness Il-qatar, royal bodyguard.
Copy of this letter which Naṣibi sent to Nabû-iqiša.
May they grant you happiness and physical well-being forever! May they grant it to the king, my lord!
I have not asked the Lidiaeans, nor have I asked the Luqeans.
... very
The Taziru ...
By the gods of the king, my lord:
Marduk and Zarpanitu, the gods,
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract, whether these men or any relative of theirs or their cohort commander, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Amurru-Nergal,
... Kenî
11th day.
and his people, ... ,
News of the Urarṭian: ... the departure of ... the emissary of the Mannean ... oxen and sheep ... the Arameans ... said: "... there."
He shall pay in Tebet (X).
When he sent (his) messenger to inquire about the well-being of the king, the prince, the god Nunnamnir, (and) the good health of his (own) offspring, he did not receive an answer to his inquiry. He became angry and furious, and his face was darkened. He did not show mercy to the king, his father, (and) he did not say: “The land Šubaru is a good land.” He sent his eunuchs against them and they killed them. He became angry and furious, and his face became darker
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
On the 5th day Aššur-belu-... came to me with a report of the king, my lord. He told me about ...
To ... , the king, our lord:
Witness NN, son of Bel-eriba.
— Venus stands in Anunitu.
a cup of quinces;
If he has passed on the right side, the donkey ...
I conquered from the source of the River Subnat to Mount Nikippa, ... , as far as Mount Urumme, (and) I subdued (them). I conquered from Mount Nirbu to Mount Gilzānu (and) the city Ḫubuškia. I annexed to my land the land of the people of Zamua, (and) I counted as booty the people of the land of the people of Unqi.
... throne (land) adjoining Aššur-...
... them
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
1 ... of Tikrakiri;
A thigh, a shoulder, outer cuts;
When he comes out, he will enter into the presence of the king. Let them do as they deem best. They should make the king rise, perform the ritual, and go.
... decision for the king, my lord,
Tiglath-pileser, conqueror of enemies, subduer of all (enemies), overthrower of all (enemies),
to ...
Bariki-ilu, the temple steward, who had fled from the Akitu House, has now returned and is in the presence of the people. The king has said: "Ask him!" Let the king, our lord, ask him.
Witness Sama.
... the governor of Harran
cohort commanders;
a 2-seah jar of bittersweet beer;
... should have examined ...
... -le'i
I said: "... will come ...
From 30 sons of ...
... I am dying because of it.
Ashur-bunaya-usur,
... the king should ...
of the day ...
Palace of Shalmaneser, great king, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), great king, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also great king, strong king, king of the universe, (and) king of Assyria.
... the king, my lord
... Dur-Yakin
Concerning what you asked me: "...
... he rejoiced and ...
x, the front red, of the country;
If Jupiter reaches Regulus and passes it, and Regulus reaches Jupiter and passes it, and Jupiter reaches the Pleiades and passes it: there will be a revolt, variant: there will be an uprising.
... ;
... of the king, my lord, I have brought up from the midst of Tiglath-pileser (III), king of Assyria, the fathers of the kings of Assyria.
The king ... before the window ...
— On the 14th day the moon was seen together with the sun.
of ... archers
Kubabu-ila'i, the king, my lord, is our lord. We are his servants. We have written to the king, my lord, in the city of Til-Aššuri. This was the news.
until he himself ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Go and inspect the fortresses on the border of Muṣaṣir; I have seen many (of them), and they are very well."
450 silver (items) of the chief cupbearer, by the (measure of) a wooden chest.
The king goes straight to the palace.
Sîn, Ningal, Rēš, king of Enlil, king of Anu:
The crown prince is doing very well; he has set out on the road and is on his way. He has gone a distance of 3 leagues. As soon as he has gone a distance of x leagues, he will set out again.
Total 1,112 (shekels), the 29th of Iyyar (II).
As to what the king, our lord, wrote to us: "...
... for the guard
2 'litres' of midru-bread;
NN, ... ;
Now, concerning the horses trained to the yoke about which I said to my brother: "Let them come here" —
... his people
... I will bring
Seal of NN, owner of the women being sold.
Šamaš-eriba, servant of Hakkubu —
who surrounded ...
Witness ... -Adad.
I had gates opened up in it in four directions, in front and behind, (and) along both sides, for entering the presence of the king, their lord. I had (them) named as follows: “The Gate of the Rising Sun,” “The Gate of the Setting Sun,” “The Gate of the Rising Moon,” and “The Gate of the Setting Moon.”
... reign of Sargon ... reign of Sargon ...
In Kislev (IX), the 15th day, eponymy of Šulmu-šarri, governor of the city Ḫalzi-adbar (691 B.C.).
Witness Nabû-da''in, ditto.
Witness Mannu-lu-šulmu.
He said as follows: "The doors of the temple of Sîn, of the temple of Šamaš, and of Nikkal are finished. The silver is paid completely. I have been remiss, (but) I will finish the work by the 1st of Tishri (VII)."
in ...
... the series
The lands Bīt-Ḫamban, Sumurzu, Bīt-Barrû, Bīt-Zualzaš, Bīt-Matti,
Adar (XII), the harvest of Sivan (III).
(Property) of Aššur-mukin-pir'i, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (I), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also vice-regent of the god Aššur: property of the city Kār-Tukultī-Ninurta. Šerua-eṭerat.
I had a foundation inscription written in my name, written in the name of the god Šamaš, the one who created me, written in the name of the god Adad, the one who makes me great, written in the name of the god Enlil, the one who decrees my fate, written in the name of the goddess Mullissu, the one who named me, written in the name of the god Šakkan, the one who makes my omens favorable, written in the name of the god Anu, and the goddess Ištar, the one who decrees my fate
The king, my lord, will catch ...
The silver shall increase by two minas or three minas per mina, according to the standard of Aššur and Mullissu. When the work is finished, they shall pay the silver in full.
a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
... vineyard in Til-Zanî; Manî, gardener, and his people;
exorcist ...
x ... of field, 1 house, a barnyard, in the town of ...
who did not keep this treaty of theirs,
... ;
2 'litres' of midru-bread; 2 'litres' of spiced bread.
... the king, my lord, said
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
Alternatively, the king, my lord, may decide that it is appropriate to perform (the ritual) tomorrow.
Of the 24th day. Care of Šamaš-ibni.
On my eighth campaign, I marched against Dunānu, son of Bēl-iqīša, to the land Gambulu, which had not submitted to the king of the land Elam. (v 10) With my mighty battle array, I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the city Ša-pī-Bēl, his fortified city, which is on the shore of the sea.
Concerning the captives about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me,
An estate of x hectares adjoining the road to Issete, adjoining Nabû-šezibanni, adjoining Nabû-... -iddina —
When the king, my lord, ...
Mugallu the Melidean ...
... flag
Witness Issar-šumu-iddina, scribe.
Ditto, ditto! May all the gods who are mentioned by name in this treaty tablet make you, your seed and your seed's seed like iron, and may they never let you out alive.
The king, my lord, must not say: "One has written to you, and you have mobilized the army." What have you seen?
Ištar, Ištar of the reed hut, Ber, Tammuz:
The heart of the sheep is normal...
... Bel-šallim
Witness Gi...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether the owner of the field or anyone else, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation,
... bedroom
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Abi-ri, or his sons or grandsons or brothers or nephews, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Mannu-ki-Arbail, his sons and grandsons, shall place 10 minas of refined silver and 15 minas of pure gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Witness Na'id-Adad.
I carried off people and booty from the land Elam, which is in the territory of the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Šarrat-Kidmuri, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, and Nergal. I added (them) to my troops. I made the troops of my royal majesty take the road to my governors (and) my officials. I ... ed my ... like a flock of sheep.
... the woman ...
... in this manner ...
... of Nineveh ... he cut down ...
Witness Remut-ili.
The priest of the ziggurrat and the temples go (away).
... in the land of Akkad ...
... arrow
I have sent a report to the king, my lord, concerning the sacrifices to the Inner City.
... king of the world, king of Assyria, ... , ... , Marduk, Zarpanītu, beloved of Nabû, Tašmētu, ... governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, son of Esarhaddon, ... , king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, ... who ... to the kingship ... , who is assiduous towards his sanctuaries, ...
... I asked him, saying: "Tell me! Nabû-mušallim
... his sons
Nabû-pir'u-šagmê
... to the king
Total, of Šulmu-ahhe, son of Uadi.
to ...
And the rest of the ... of Assyria has also been cut off. Let the chief ... , the call-up officers, and the ... -men come and work with them.
Urdu-Nabû has written a letter to Bel-eṭir and to Šamaš-zeru-iqiša.
Nabû-eṭir-šamê, a šandabakku, has appealed to the king, my lord, saying: "Let him be ... "
Witness Šar-Issar, ...
1 hand-ring of gold, 1 mina 4 1/4 shekels, 1 arm-ring of gold, 1/3 mina 1/3 shekels, 3 shekels, 1 mina, ditto, ditto, the coiled band ditto, ditto;
At that time, I was revering him, saying: "I will pray to Enlil, the gods, (and) Marduk."
At that time, the temple of the god Sîn, which Shalmaneser (I), son of Ashurnasirpal (II), a king of the past, a forefather of mine, had built — that temple had become old and its walls had buckled. I removed its dilapidated section(s) down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I rebuilt (it) from top to bottom. I made its structure larger than the one in the days of the past.
owner of the ... being sold.
Witness NN, cohort commander.
I had foundation inscriptions made, had the mighty victories that I achieved over my enemies written on them, and I erected (them) at their gates for ever after.
... outside
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you send me a letter from the beginning until now, and why did you come here? Let your messengers come to me! On the 1st of Shebat (XI) the lady Barsipitu and Nabû-šumu-iddina came to me. I sent them on the 16th of Shebat to the feet of the messengers of the king, my lord, and they have brought me the messengers with them. I have written to the king, my lord, ...
The mountains, the rivers, the city of Duri, the cella, the palace, the ... ,
Does your great divinity know it? Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
1, Aplaya, palace herald;
... his ...
Review Palace of the New Corps.
... ;
The coils of the colon are 14 in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
a flagon of beer of bruised grain.
... the star of Karabu
the wife of the palace manager;
... that palace, the one in which the former prince had had the terrace built and which had become dilapidated — I removed its dilapidated section(s) and ... I made my lordly majesty, which the gods Aššur and Ninurta had granted to me, enter that palace. I made splendid ... , (and) I made (it) resplendent in its entirety.
... they shall glaze the bricks.
From Ašaredu, son of Damqaya, servant of the king.
... in its entirety
Witness Adad-šumu-iškun, ...
Total, of the temple of Nabû, his priest.
... and in ...
The money is paid completely. That woman is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
x+34 horses,
they are making ...
Total, Aššur-matu-taqqin, village manager.
a total of 164 Kushite horses and 35 cavalry mounts, 6 mules —
... he has taken care of
... the ... s who came with me, his associates
... he says: "Nobody has taken him into ...
... the Urarṭian
From Issar-šumu-ereš.
... has been built
... The left of the 'finger' is split. The breast-bone is thick...
... ditto,
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord! The fort and the zakku and the servants of the king, my lord, are well.
On my return march, I defeated all together the Tuʾumuna, Riḫiḫu, Ubudu, Gibrê, Maliḫu, Gurumu, Ubulu, Damunu, Gambulu, Ḫindaru, Ruʾuʾa, Puqudu, Ḫamrānu, Ḫagarānu, Nabatu, (and) Liʾtaʾu, insubmissive Arameans.
of the king ...
Witness Adad-naṣir, ...
Tab-shar-Aššur, son of Aššur-bēl-kala.
... the king, my lord
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
Witness Nabû-...
... there is
The king's word to NN: I am well; you can be glad.
3 bags of sesame;
Witness Isanayu.
... to Marduk-aplu-iddina
NN and his people, NN and his people,
(As for) the brothers of mine, the magnates, (and) their brother, I, with the support of the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl and Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela, my forefathers, I stood in the midst of my brothers, and said to them as follows: “Let me go and make my name great in the mouths of the people of Assyria, the sons of my father’s house, (and) let me exercise dominion over
... he will die.
The daytime of the 11th day was cloudy, ... which we were to do ... its place ...
... of my father's house ... you have glazed bricks. The two sons of the lady Kakkullanu, in all five persons, a bed with its board, three blankets, a chair, a table,
Tab-shar-Ashur,
The halo of the star Spica is very dark. It is seen in the morning watch.
Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it? Does your great divinity know it?
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
On my eighth campaign, I marched against Dunānu, son of Bēl-iqīša, to the land Gambulu, which had not submitted to the king of the land Elam. (v 10) I conquered the entire land Gambulu in its entirety. I captured the city Ša-pī-Bēl, his fortified city, which is on the bank of the Nāda River.
Witness NN, scribe.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
... enter ...
I conquered the city Adummatu, a fortified city, the dwelling of the Arabs, which Sennacherib, king of Assyria, my father, had conquered and plundered. I brought (the people of) it (Adummatu) to Assyria and counted (them) as Assyrians. Hazael, the Arabs, saw the dust cloud of my expeditionary force, feared the gods Aššur, Samaš, Adad, (and) Bēl (Marduk), the gods of the Arabs, and the
If the moon is eclipsed in Sivan (III): Adad will devastate.
If it is agreeable to the king, ...
Dayyan-Inurta,
And I will give orders to NN. He shall not be detained.
Witness Riba-ahhe.
Month of Ḫibur, eponymy of Šuma-iqbi, the Sebetti.
Month of ... , ... th day, eponym year of ...
Disregard what happens after my stipulated term...
From Balasî.
... I did and ... the Assyrian yoke ... in all the lands which I conquered ...
Now then I am writing to you: there is no ... of the people, and they are not reliable ... the governor.
The Urarṭian has not agreed to give them back. In his absence, the son of Irtaškannu ...
May Nabû (and) Marduk bless the king, my lord! May they grant long days, fullness of old age, and complete health to the king, my lord!
Zar-Issar, his son of 4 spans' height; ... ;
... him ...
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also king of Assyria: booty of the city Ruqūtu of Bīt-Adini.
... you did not ...
Total, x ... s at the disposal of Kiṣir-... , of the king.
Witness Šumma-Adad. Witness Ahu-illika.
NN, son of Abi-haza, his brother, whom Našî-ilu, the sheikh, son of Hattâ, had taken to Babylon in the time of the great famine —
I brought back to Nineveh 10 mules, 10 chariots, (and) the substantial booty of the palace of the city Kalḫu. I received from the palace officials of the land Sūḫu, the lands Ḫindānu (and) Ḫatti, the land Ḫatti, (and) the land Ḫatti.
Palace of Šamšī-Adad, son of Išme-Dagan (II) ...
Witness Šep-Issar, servant of the governor of Birtu.
... As to what you wrote: "When ... , they attacked me and Marduk-aplu-... , and ... , and ... , and ... , (and) Aššur, Bel and Nabû, my gods, like ...
is placed on them ...
I received gold (and) shining silver sling straps as their wrist-trappings, (and) slashed off their belts with sharp swords. I took away gold (and) silver belt-daggers as their waist-trappings.
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, chariot driver.
... returned
The coils of the colon are 16 in number...
x scarves,
I received the payment of Ianzû, the king of the land Naʾiri, in the city Ḫubuškia, a fortified city. Six of the fortresses of Ursa, together with their settlements, ... I conquered. I carried off ... eight fortresses together with the cities in their environs, which belong to the land Tuāya.
... fish ...
The lower part is elevated ... The left of the gall bladder ...
a cup of quinces;
10 talents, 15 minas ...
— Jupiter stood there one month over its period.
x+1 cloaks, the front red, ... ;
The land of Akkad will become happy in the steppe; the mood of the troops will be good; the king will become happy.
NN, his son, of 3 spans' height;
3 ... ;
I gave the gold to them, saying: "When you have finished the work of the god Uṣur-amāssu and the temple of the goddess Muṣaṣir, you shall perform the (following) rites of Nanaya."
The 'strength' is absent.
I joyfully entered that palace, which is in Babylon, (and) opened its treasury. I brought out gold, silver, gold (and) silver utensils, precious stones, all kinds of possessions (and) property, a substantial treasure, (together with) his palace women, courtiers, attendants, all of the craftsmen, as many as there were, (and) his palace attendants, and I counted (them) as booty.
The king, my lord, should know (this). The Šubrian has said: "...
If they are killed or captured,
And don't be negligent about your work!
The series has been completely written. The part that I have written is not yet finished. It will be finished in two days. The king, my lord, can be glad.
They are doing the work.
(As for) Sangu-Marduk, the lord of the temple of Eṭir-Yaʾu, who did not revere the king, his lord, and who plundered the temple of his lord, he brought about his defeat and did battle with him. He felled with the sword the army of the enemy and the army of his enemy. He took away as booty the property of the king of the land Elam, his land, and the property of the king of Nabû, his enemy. He seized with his hand the right hand of the land Elam.
After I had descended from Mount Uaia, I approached the district of Ianzû, king of the land Naʾiri. Ianzû, king of the land Naʾiri, came out from the city Ḫubuškia, a royal city of his, and kissed my feet. I received from him horses, oxen, and sheep and goats in the city Ḫubuškia, a city of his.
Witness Huhhazu.
My battle troops who are in the land Mangisu — which is inside (the territory of) the city Sumandir —
... to the king
... seized
Now there are people who are running away. I am sending them to them. If they are in my country, I shall send them to them, and if the river has crossed, I shall cross it.
The money is paid completely. That field is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
a basket of (mixed) fruit.
Zizî,
... he asked
An estate of 2 hectares of land adjoining Mannu-ki-Arbail, adjoining the road to Calah,
From the 20th day of the month ...
... and he made him sit on the throne of the four quarters. He ... and he made him great. He made the land of the Sealand, which is before the god Ninurta, bow down at his feet. He ... king of Assyria, property of Ešarra.
... is cut off ...
... ground, a wadi
... and he made the people ... he built and ...
If Venus disappears in the west in Ab (V) from the 1st to the 30th day: there will be rains; the harvest of the land will prosper.
of the days ...
(As for) NN, the eunuch of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, the lord of the vassals who had sided with him against the king, his lord, and had plotted evil (deeds), he stood before me in a place of his choosing and beseeched my lordly majesty. I had mercy on him and allowed him to live in my palace. I set a guard over him (and)
... gold rings for his servants
To the king, my lord: your servant Gabbu-ana-Aššur.
Kush,
fumigants ... ;
Witness ... ayate.
... before the king of Babylon
1 seah 1 'litre' of regular offering loaves;
... he seized the god Ninurta on account of the god Enlil and returned him to his place.
Adad-hutni, farmer; 2 sons; 1 man; 1 woman; 1 son; 1 woman; 1 daughter, weaned: a total of 5 people.
adjoining the house of Bahianu, adjoining the house of Daniati-il,
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Month Iyyar (II), 5th day, eponym year of Gambulu.
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
The ... s bless Ea.
Witness Nabû-zeru-iqiša.
To the king, my lord: your servant Mannu-ki-Ninua. Good health to the king, my lord! The land of the king my lord is well.
From this very fact it is clear that I have not been negligent in my efforts to perform the work of this city. On the 7th day I shall perform the ritual and perform it correctly.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, (or) have jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
... the former magnates
... them
20, his guards;
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: good for Akkad, bad for Elam.
... of Aššur, my lord, who after ... paid tribute to Aššur, my lord, with the support of Aššur, my lord, and the goddess Nergal, my face-painter, ... to my own offspring ... the one who makes my priesthood great ... the gods of the House of Aššur, the god Šamaš, ... my palace, I built.
The king, my lord, should not be negligent ... the eyes of the king, my lord, are ... ; ...
The remainder of the bricks of the large bēt ēqi of the city Kār-Tukultī-Ninurta.
We are the ones who are constantly attentive to the well-being of the king, our lord, and who are assiduous towards his shrines. I am the one who constantly prays to the god(s) for the life of the king, my lord.
In the morning, when I was writing to the king, my lord, about the gold which I had collected, I said to the king, my lord: "Let the king, my lord, write to his servant that the king ...
... I wrote to the king ...
We have brought the men to the king my lord's designated place. We shall go and bring the logs, and we shall then return and bring the rest of the logs into the centre of the city.
From Inurta-kudurrī-uṣur, son of the king.
I marched to the city Melid, which is on the border of the land Ḫatti. I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the city. I conquered the city Sangara, which is on the border of the land Isua and the land Sūḫu. I carried off captives (and) possessions and brought (them) to my land.
... half a 'litre' each;
... much ...
I bowed down to the yoke of the gods Aššur, Mullissu, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela, the great gods, my lords, who had encouraged me and inspired me with confidence. I did not give back the people who had been carried off as booty, ... I did not give back the people who had been held captive in his (Šalmaneser’s) prison. In that year, at that time,
... from
Care of Aššur-killanni.
He is in my presence ...
Dutanu ...
The king, my lord, has done a favour for the house of bricks of my father and of Nikkal. He has provided for the house of bricks of Nikkal.
Witness Issar-taqi-nishi.
Nabu-eṭir,
Moreover, I had a portico, a replica of a Hittite palace, which is called bīt-ḫilāni in the language of the goddess Bēlet-ilī, constructed over the entire length of (its) four sides and (then) I had two sphinxes of white limestone created and I positioned (them) at its gates.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
... he is bringing the people to Assyria ...
Palace of Tiglath-pileser, king of the universe, king of Assyria: (this is) the booty of the bank of the River Ḫusir, of the city Nineveh.
100 (items): a pectoral, a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ... , a ...
The middle of the 'station' is effaced ...
... ditto,
... Man-ki-šarri
... Ahu-duri
... the 'path' is curled.
The chief of the mule express and the chief of the female mule express have not yet returned there. Now I should bring 30 houses there, and let the men of Nabû-ṣalli, the prefect, and the cohort commander stay in the town of Hirsama. Let them bring them here, and let them give them fields and orchards there.
Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, has contracted and bought him from Issar-duri and Lu-šakin for 4 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
1 urnutu-garment, ditto, the edging ditto, knotted, the fringe ... ;
Tab-shar-Ashur, son of Bel-aplu-iddina.
2 sheep, (and) a bowl (of wine):
Witness ... -abu-uṣur. Witness Abi-ram, city overseer.
Month Elul (VI), 13th day.
Now the messengers of the son of Zerua, who went to the king my lord's orders concerning the city of Kisik,
And the heart of the king, my lord, is happy. Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "What else?" The king, my lord, can be glad about the cohort which is in front of you.
I created inside it a replica of the (divine) abode, a perfect copy of Eḫursaggalkurkurra, in which I placed all of the precious stones (and) all of the precious metals, as well as the possessions of the (divine) abode(s), and (thereby) I made its site shine like daylight. I made its structure larger than before, (and) its dimensions greater than those of the (former) ziggurrat. I made its site bigger than the one before, (and) its height greater than the one before. I
I have performed the sacrifices of the 5th day before Aššur and the gods of the king, my lord, and all of them have been completely sacrificed.
I seized him and ... , saying: "Why have you seized this man?" He said: "He is a man who has committed a crime. He has stolen from him three minas of silver and has also taken from him a ... "
In the month of Tammuz (IV), when the tribute of a pot was brought in, they sold one pot for x shekels of silver, one pot for 12 1/2 shekels of silver, and one pot for 3 shekels of silver.
... went
I carried off silver and gold, the property of the land of Sumer and Akkad, the land of Karduniaš (Babylonia), (and) the land of Šubaru, together with substantial booty from the land Elam. I conquered the land Elam from top to bottom. I brought to Assyria the royal insignia of the kings of the land Akkad and the royal insignia of Šamaš-šuma-ukīn. I made the land Elam bow down to my yoke. I cut down with the sword the royal trees of
The money is paid completely. Those fields, houses, threshing floors, gardens, wells and grazing land are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
As to the merchants about whom my lord said: "They must not be detained, and they must not bring silver" — I have detained 14 minas of silver.
... 1/2 'litre';
I have appointed them in the service of the king, my lord.
Witness NN, from Hatarikka. Witness NN.
One chariot fighter, two cavalrymen, three mounted scouts, and four dismounted scouts.
... the remnants of the plundered ...
... to them ...
He brought before me Yahiqa, his daughter, who had never crossed the sea, and sent (her) to do obeisance to me. I received from him his daughter and his sisters, together with a large marriage gift. I had mercy on him and (then) I gave (his) son, his offspring, back to him.
From Ašaredu the older.
... the king, our lord,
Their orchards ... Giri-Ba'al ... three emissaries of the city ... have come in with tribute.
... the sun ...
Witness NN.
... the second vizier
At that time the Great Wall of my city Aššur and the wall of the outer city (which is) before the Tisarru Gate, (vii 10) together with their (inner) walls, had become dilapidated and old. I removed their dilapidated parts down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I rebuilt (them) from top to bottom. I laid its foundation on a massive mountain. I built (and) completed (it) from top to bottom. I set up my stele.
... tablets not ...
adjoining the field of Šulmu-beli, son of NN,
... ditto,
An estate of 4 decares ... ,
Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, chosen of Aššur, vice-regent of Aššur, favorite of the gods Anu and Enlil, whom the god Aššur and the great gods made greater than all of the kings who sit on (royal) daises and made his dominion greater than all of the kings of the four quarters, the one who subdued all of the insubmissive lands, king of all of the lands, the one who gathered together all of the gods of heaven
To the king, my lord: your servant Bel-eriba. Good health to the king, my lord!
... ;
... , the Arraphean; Ea-šarru, Belet-ili, Babu, Enlil, Adad, Šala, Sin, Nikkal, the Image of the King, Šakkan, Šarrat-eqi, the Lions, the Storm-birds, the Bulls, the Birds, the Crows,
to Esarhaddon, king of Assyria ...
Witness Šulmu-šarri.
1 bag of sesame; 6 ditto of kernels.
These five months ...
Witness Mutaqqin-Sin. Witness Adî, merchant.
I created inside it a replica of the (divine) abode of Aššur, a replica of the (divine) abode of the goddess Ištar, (and) a replica of the (divine) abode of the goddess Bēlet-ilī, (and) I called it “The Palace of the Great Mountain.” I made it 700 cubits long (and) 168 cubits wide. I had a canal dug from the Ḫusur River to the plain and I called it “The Canal of the Rising
Witness Banî, deputy of the chief physician.
Eponym year of Arbailayu, chief treasurer.
Witness Dugul-la-teši-ibni. Witness Nabû-nadin-ahi.
... and
... has been erased
Witness Mannu-ki-Aššur, ditto.
he turned back ...
... I have heard
20 minas, NN, merchant ...
If a cow gives birth to three (young): the land will change.
... without
161 cavalrymen, 130 chariot-men, 52 lancers: total 343.
a 2-seah jar of Assyrian budê-confection;
... rubble
... my chariot in the midst of battle
... my citizen
... the 'hand' of ...
Total: 2 (of) Raṣappa.
... to the king
... my land
I asked ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... Dur-Šamaš-rēša-uṣur.
... houses in Calah, the palace
... from Elam
... wine for the days ...
1 large gold sword, whose weight is 26 1/3 minas of gold;
After the letter of the king had come into my presence, I wrote to the king about him. If he had not been brought out, I would have written to the king about his servant.
... &  beer  &  Ahu-lurši
Moreover, breccia, as much as is needed (for making) burzigallu-bowls, (a stone) that had never been seen before, revealed itself at Kapridargilâ (“Dargilâ Village”).
This is the rest of the words from the letter.
Witness Nanî, ditto of Nabû.
May a later prince restore its weakened (portions) (and) return my inscribed name to its place. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
or the ... , or the bowmen, or the weavers,
Total, of the chariot-horse-trainers.
... of ...
... the ... eans will ...
These are the wells which Baal, king of Assyria, appointed for Baalu, his servant, in the districts of the land Pillatu and in the cities on the border of Assyria opposite the sea. And in the city Gublu, in the district of the land Ḫanigalbat, in the cities of the land Isana which are in the district of the sea.
all my cities ...
Witness Kunaya, eunuch of ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Issar-šumu-ereš. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I struck down with the sword the people of the land Bīt-Barrû, who live in the high mountains. I cut off the head of the land Tīl-Ašurri, which is called Pitānu in the language of the people of the land Miḫrānu.
adjoining the field of Nabû-šapik-zeri, adjoining the field of Ammini-ilu, adjoining the road to Issete, adjoining the mountain, adjoining the field of Abi-ṭab,
1 hectare 1 decare, road of Qumbate, adjoining Qaqaya, road of Qumbate,
Land of the Bit-Ammonites
2 seahs, the 21st day;
of the palace herald.
... he shall place there.
The servants of Bel-ahhe-riba who came to the king, my lord, saying: "Our brothers are in Na... " — Nergal-ša-... , the royal bodyguard whom the king, my lord, sent with them, has ... ed these ... s of ...
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Bīt-Zabidaya, Uruk, Kullab, Egišnugal, Nēmed-Laguda, Dūr-Yakīn, (and) Kār-Nabû-šuma-iškun, which are on the shore of the sea. I conquered eight fortified walled cities of the land Bīt-Yakīn, together with 100 small(er) settlements in their environs.
After I had taken away from the city Zanuš to the west, in accordance with the command of the god Marduk, I appointed a protégé of Esagil in charge of the rest of the temples of Babylon. In accordance with the command of the god Marduk, I said as follows:
Shamash-ilaya,
Witness Šamaš-ahu-iddina, physician.
a cup of small onions; a ditto of quinces;
This is what Bel-ušezib is sending to the king, his lord. The king should act accordingly.
From this day on, as long as I live, I shall do whatever is good and pleasing to the king, my lord.
... I appointed
Sa'arri
Month Iyyar (II), 25th day, eponym year of Nabû-šarru-uṣur of Marqasa.
As to what you wrote to me: "The messenger of Mitâ the Phrygian has come to me, saying: 'I have sent 14 men of the Qurueans to Urarṭu. They are bringing them to me. They are very much at ease. Aššur, Šamaš and Bel have made my gods enter into the midst of the Phrygian country. They have given us the following order: 'Bring us the rest of the Phrygians and we shall give you the land of Sūḫu.'"
1 bowl (of wine): the chief confectioner of the palace.
4 ditto of silver;
From Bel-šuma-iškun, lamentation priest.
Now then I am sending them to the king, together with ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-reṣuwa. Good health to the king, my lord!
Sin-duri, ... , his son, his wife, his daughter, ... , Uza... , his prefect, his wife, a total of 10 persons;
at the disposal of ...
I said: "Perhaps he will say: 'We will not go ... '
11 houses ...
the governor ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "I am concerned about the watch; I have become afraid" —
... their watch is overcast, and the work on the constellation is incomplete.
An estate of 2 hectares of land, a wadi, Ahi-qamu;
... the dead one
Witness Issar-aplu-iddina, son of NN.
... the family of Pa'ê, the legate of the Arabs, ... said to me: "...
strong ...
... in Waisi. The king has become angry with the villages.
The money is paid completely. That ... is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
May Aššur, Enlil and Ninurta, ... , give you victory, power, might and conquest; may they make the subjects of the king, your servant, bow down at your feet.
I have sent ...
Witness NN, skipper from Šišil.
Seal of Salamanu, owner of the ... being sold.
1 house; 1 threshing-floor; in all 2 farmers. 60 hectares of arable land, 40 hectares under cultivation therein. 2 houses; 1 threshing-floor; 1 vegetable garden.
Quraysa, his wife and two daughters, a total of 5;
... he made to disappear.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
You offer cooked meat before Belet-ili, make a flour/incense-offering, pour oil, honey, beer and wine, and sing, “... , O Gipšu, you are exalted, O Ea, you are strong, you are exalted to the netherworld.”
I wish to greet the treasurer, my lord, and the treasurer, my lord, is not well. Without the king, ... and I have not written to the treasurer, my lord.
Aššur-rēša-iši, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Mutakkil-Nusku, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-dān (I) (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur: builder of the temple of the god Adad.
... he holds ...
... to me
You revive ...
... The coils of the colon are 14 in number...
Enlil-nāṣir, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Puzur-Aššur (I), vice-regent of the god Aššur:
I set Šarru-lū-dāri, son of Rūkibtu, their former king, over the people of the city Ashkelon and imposed upon him the payment of tribute (and) gifts (in recognition) of my overlordship.
Disregard that the subject of this query, Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, is marching to the city of Enlil, and (that) ...
At that time, the sanctuary of the god Aššur, my lord, which a former king had built, had become dilapidated and old. I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I rebuilt (it) from top to bottom. I made it bigger than before. I laid its foundation on top of the foundation of the city Ubasê. I deposited my monumental inscription.
in the house of your wrath.
He provides roast meat before Šamaš, (while) he sings, “The heroic one.”
... the vizier
Total 2: Tabnî, scribe of the chief eunuch of the crown prince.
The kurgarrûs and the Sasanu who are being released and going down to the underworld are Enlil, Bel and Nabû.
Witness NN, chief ...
From ... hiâ.
... he established ... Taharqa ... five times in the constellations ... the Babylonians ...
... his servant wrote to him:
... and his people
Adad-nerari (III),
The foundation of the terrace of the Inner City.
Witness Daulî, ditto.
If the gall bladder is flattened on the right side: defeat.
x minas of silver, Ram... , merchant.
Witness Šamaš-šallim, chariot driver.
If the moon is surrounded by a black halo: the month holds rain.
I settled the people of the lands conquered by me therein. I placed a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over them.
... the city of Aššur
The days have become long in ... ; the sun ... not ...
... let them speak
If the Old Man star comes close to the top of the moon and stands there: the king will stand in triumph.
and he will not abandon the city which is his own ...
Moreover, (as for) Ṣidqâ, the king of the city Ashkelon who had not bowed down to my yoke, I forcibly removed the gods of his father’s house, himself, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his brothers, (and other) offspring of his father’s house and took him to Assyria.
And concerning the Lady of Akkad about whom I wrote to the king, my lord: "She is staying in the Akitu chapel" —
May a later prince restore its weakened (portions) (and) return my inscribed name to its place.
17 (sheep), owners of the meal;
May DNN bless the king, my lord! May they consolidate the foundation of the royal throne of the king, my lord!
Now then we shall keep the watch of Tebet (X) and write to the king, our lord.
... before ...
... Arzabâ ... in the middle of Kumme ... of Assyria. He says: "If the treasurer commands, I shall bring (them)." I am going to bring them.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Il-amara or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or his labour-duty superior,
Concerning the substitute king about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let him go to the province of ... " —
... the halo of the moon ...
The temple of (the god) Aššur, which Shalmaneser (I), son of Adad-nārārī (I), king of Assyria, a king who preceded me, had previously built — (this temple) had become dilapidated and I rebuilt (it). I deposited my clay cone.
Witness Silim-Aššur, scribe.
From Nergal-eṭir.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to his servant: "Who is your competitor?" — he is a very strong one, he is a competitor indeed.
The king's word to the clergy of the mausoleum of the lords of Babylon: I am well; Assyria is well; you can be glad.
If a planet comes close to Regulus: the crown prince will sit on the throne, and he will exercise the kingship for many years; the throne will be stable; the great gods will give you confidence; you will conquer enemies; the gods will make the temples of the great gods enter into their presence; the king will stand in triumph.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
not ...
Witness Bel-...
Witness Qibinnî, haruspex. Witness Milqi-ilu.
Mitinti of the land Ashkelon rebelled against the treaty of the great gods and sided with me. He saw the defeat of Raḫiānu (Rezin) son of ... on his throne and ... He came to his aid and ... He brought 500 ... to his city, the city Ḫirimmu. He ... Idi-Bīʾī, the Arabs ...
... brings
This is its interpretation.
and the ground beneath it is elevated.
(As for) Necho (and) Šarru-lū-dāri, (and) Pān-Ḫarān, the kings whom the god Marduk, my lord, had named for shepherding the land Egypt, who had abandoned the treaty of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, my lords, and had committed evil (deeds), they plundered the land of Egypt and (then) fled to me. I caught them like fish from the midst of the sea and brought them before me. I bound them with a bear’
If the moon is eclipsed in intercalary Adar (XII): the land will experience a severe winter, and the ruler will be humiliated.
The day before yesterday, Nabû-ušabši gave orders to Kudurru: he sent 2 sons of his and 30 men with him to the king of Babylon. The king should ask the men who ... with him ...
1 prayer bowl ditto;
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šar-aḫḫēšu, the steward of Bit-Amukani and Bit-Nabû-dalâ. Good health to the king, my lord! The king, my lord, can be glad indeed about my watch. As long as the king, my lord, lives, I will guard him and his palace.
Witness NN, chief of the master builders.
Ši-ibši, ... ;
Shamash-ilaya,
This year may the corn and the ...
at the disposal of Ereš-Issar,
10 ditto, hallam;
(As for) Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II), the king of the land Elam who had cast off the yoke of my lordship, he fled alone and took to the steppe. Tammarītu rebelled against him and cut down with the sword his body, together with that of his family.
The king, my lord, wrote to me about what the king, my lord, wrote to me.
... do not fear
2 hectares of field in the town of Asihi; Atta'-idri, farmer, and his people;
If there is a 'weapon'-mark in the top of the left surface of the 'finger' and it faces the top of the 'finger': the enemy's attack will be successful...
... I had them bring them into GN, ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... ,
Witness Šulmu-ahhe, ditto.
Ulūlu (VI), the twenty-fifth day, eponymy of Sennacherib, king of the world.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
... I roofed them with beams of cedar. I fastened bands of bronze on doors of white cedar and I installed (them) in their gates.
... is complete
Witness Ṭab-šar-Nabû, scribe, keeper of the tablet.
... bread ...
... he ...
1 piece of ivory and 1 wooden box of apricots;
Minu' ...
If a storm blows from the south: the harvest of sesame will not prosper.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments ...
If you should sin against Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, his brothers, ... , and should be negligent in the guard of ... , you shall not ... , and you shall not ... in their midst. He has concluded a treaty with you, saying: "You shall not sin against this treaty."
Witness Nergal-ahu-uṣur, commander-of-fifty of ...
Because ...
... the wall ...
3,000 stalks of vine.
The guard ...
... the king, my lord
... of the king ...
1 hectare — Ṣabutanu;
(As for) the one who changes (an inscription) written in my name and the work of the gods, may the god Aššur, father of the gods, glare at him angrily and destroy his seed, his offspring, (and) his progeny. May he not stand firm before his enemies, may he not achieve his desire, (and) may he not exercise the kingship that the gods have given him.
I shall finish the borders of all the lands.
... -ibni
... who dwells in his (own) place, ... I surrounded, captured, (and) plundered.
10 ditto, ... ;
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer ...
They say: "We will not enter the Palace. We will stay in the outskirts and speak in the king's presence."
— This night the moon was surrounded by a halo, Cancer and Gemini stood in it.
May they place ...
... I became afraid ...
5 sheep, 5 bowls (of wine): the queen.
... three years, the gods ... , the god Adad will devastate ... of the enemy land ... will be lost ... will be established ... Subartu.
... which to Marduk-apla-iddina
The king, my lord, should have mercy on his servant. I am not a criminal, I have no faults. May my heart not be grievous towards the king, my lord!
The people of Egypt have not come out to do work for me, saying: "Our men have been taken away."
... who sits on the throne, Azaiaš, has sent a message to Urarṭayu, saying: "... to him, and I will go to Urarṭu."
And the king should give orders that they should come to us ... of the king, and that they should not set out on their own and go to us.
... the forts of the Urarṭians which are on the border, have attacked his troops and taken prisoners in the forts.
The city Malakti has revolted against me. On the day when I heard (this), I set out against the ... cities and the Arameans. I brought out all the people and oxen that I had saved and settled them in Der.
Palace of Aššur-nādin-apli, king ...
The palace of Aššur-bēl-kala, king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, son of Tiglath-pileser (I) (who was) also king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (I) (who was) also king of the universe (and) strong king, king of Assyria.
adjoining the field of NN,
I received ... from Kibaba of Harhar ... horses and mules.
I sent him ...
Witness Ninuayu, ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
Total 19 gods of the house of God.
Witness Abunu.
a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
For his life and the well-being of his city he built the temple of the goddess Ištar.
NN, royal bodyguard;
Concerning the emissaries of Bit-Kapsi
From Nabû-šuma-iškun.
Total, from the estate of Ibâ.
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
Witness Mullissu-kabt-liphur.
On my return march, I defeated all together the Tuʾumuna, Riḫiḫu, Yadaqqu, Ubudu, Gibrê, Maliḫu, Gurumu, Ubulu, Damunu, Gambulu, Ḫindaru, Ruʾuʾa, Puqudu, Ḫamrānu, Ḫagarānu, Nabatu, (and) Liʾtaʾu, insubmissive Arameans. I carried off into Assyria a substantial booty (consisting of
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-šumu-ukin. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May the gods ... the good health of ... !
... Aššur-šumu-iddina
I swear by Aššur and Šerua that I have not changed the mind of your lords.
Shalmaneser, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil and vice-regent of the god Aššur: he built the Tabira Gate, together with its doors, for the processional way of the city Aššur.
... wrote to me
If the Pleiades enter the moon and come out to the north: the king of Akkad will become strong and have no rival.
and the message ...
Witness Adallal, ...
To the god Adad, the strong king, the king of all the lands, the exalted one, the king who makes the lands prosper, the one who knows the hearts of all people, the one who dwells in Ešarra, the one who does not change (his mind), the one who loves the temple of the god Sîn, the one who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the lands, the one who has a heart full of kindness, the one who loves justice,
5 minas of silver, 5 togas, 5 tunics, 1 pot of (mixed) fruit, 100 pomegranates, all tribute: the queen;
You shall not make common cause with any other country against Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, who is on the side of Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, against you, nor make common cause with any other country against Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, your lord, nor with your sons or your grandsons, nor with any other relative of yours, nor with any other country,
Tablet of Sagab (651), until the eponymy of Nabû-šar-aḫḫēšu, who for six years (now) has been bringing in the regular (offering) of the gods.
1 talent of ... -stone for 2 ...
Total 6 witnesses from Bit-Eriba-ila'i.
Total, 30 minas of silver ... , instead of the silver ...
I have also brought a letter from the governor of the Medes with me. I am herewith sending my messenger to the Palace.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-šar-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord!
a ... and ...
... he will die.
... until I hear the news. My messenger will set out immediately.
... they went
6, (of) the 'well-being' ... ;
The people are ...
The money is paid completely. That field is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The whole temple has been inspected. All the gods of the king are well.
The sign which the king ...
If the king, my lord, commands, I will let them bring them down and do as the king, my lord, commands.
... the stool
... Bel-sama' ...
... the lower part is elevated ...
The 'cavity' of the left lung is split...
He shall pay the silver in its original amount on the 30th of Tishri (VII). If he does not pay, it shall increase by 4 shekels of silver per month.
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-alik-pani. Good health to the king, my lord!
(As for) the base of the throne of my priestly office, which had become old and dilapidated, in the course of a renovation I removed its dilapidated parts. I inspected its ancient foundation(s) and (then) I laid its foundation(s) on top of (those) ancient foundation(s). I made (them) as secure as a mountain.
2 cuts of shoulder. Of 1 ox: the stomach, the liver,
Month Iyyar (II), 15th day, eponym year of Kanunayu of Dur-Šarruken.
... s of Nabû-ahhe-... , chief ...
Sennacherib, ... , the one who fashioned image(s) of ... , the lord who ...
The breast-bone is thick.
Šakiru, servant of Ahabû —
... from the day that ...
... I marched to the land Lulume. I conquered the cities Maqqu, Andāriā, ... , the land Adau, which is at the foot of these mountains, ... I crossed the Zab River, ... I conquered the land Lulume and the land Adau. I subdued them to my yoke. I exercised authority over them forever.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
3 haunches, 6 rib cuts;
Witness Šarru-lu-dari.
In a one-half mile stretch, I bonded together with bitumen four large limestone (blocks) and spread marsh reeds and rushes over them. I added 500 ... (and) 280 large trees that I had cut down from the city Kār-Tukultī-Ninurta. I made (them) an addition to it (and) I raised its superstructure 914 layers of brick high. I made its structure larger than before, (and) I secured its foundation on bedrock. I made its site bigger than before, (and
in the city ...
shall place 10 minas of silver (and) one mina of gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Total: 2 horses, 5 chariots, 50 shield-spearmen, 50 bowmen, total 100 men ... , 5 horses ... , Nabû-ahu-iddina ...
with the land of ...
Witness NN, scribe of the crown prince.
For the goddess Gula, for the goddess Gula-kitti, for the god Sîn of heaven, for the god Adad of heaven, for the god Šamaš of heaven, for the goddess Ištar of heaven, for the god Ninurta of the Igīgū gods, for the goddess Nergal of the Igīgū gods, for the goddess Ningal of heaven, for the goddess Ningal-kidin-šakê, for the goddess Ningal-kidin-šakê, for
If ... in the path of the Enlil stars ... the land of Akkad will become happy; the king of Akkad will become strong and have no rival.
... me, son of ...
1 ... , 12 oxen of gold;
The moon is surrounded by a halo and
(As for) the one who destroys an inscribed object bearing my name and the name of my father, or changes its position by some crafty device, may the great gods of heaven and netherworld overthrow his kingship, make his name (and) his seed disappear from the land, (and) have no pity on him.
... to the šandabakku
shall place x minas of silver (and) one mina of gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owner.
shall give 2 minas of silver.
... why ...
of the fort ...
17 hectares of sown land,
Witness Qarhâ, ditto.
I carried off the people of the city Akkuddu, insubmissive Gutians, and (then) I counted (them) as inhabitants of the city Ušmērisi. I added (them) to the numerous troops of (the god) Aššur and (thus) strengthened my army.
livers, kidneys, hearts;
... we shall place before Belet-ili ...
With my merciless body and my raging warfare, I felled with the sword the body(s) of 20,000 soldiers of the land Elam, (and) carried off as booty ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Ninurta-le'i. Good health to the king, my lord!
I brought out Padî, their king, from the city Jerusalem and placed (him) on the lordly throne over them, and (then) I imposed upon him payment (in recognition) of my overlordship.
(As for) Akkuddu of the city Šinuḫtu, who conspired with Mitâ, the king of the land Musku, to kill Daltâ, his (Mitâ’s) father, and who took away his (Daltâ’s) property, his ... , his daughters, ... , ... , ... ,
The god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises.
... returned ...
... ;
... camp
Aššur-rēša-iši, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, whom the gods Anu, Enlil, and the great gods named for shepherding the land of Assyria, and whose priesthood they made great; the one who loves the goddess Ištar, the great gods, (and) the one who reveres their great divinity; the one who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the gods, the one who provides for their shrines, the one who is att
... -ili
The women go to Nineveh and ...
... you have ...
Witness Erṣiṣi.
... he did not ...
Witness Bahî.
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, and (then) I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, fortified cities, together with the small(er) settlements in their environs (and) the district of the land Bīt-Barrû in its entirety, and I added (
After the king has entered the palace, Šarrat-nipha ... sits on the seat. The bulls and sheep of the house of Dagan are presented before the king in the courtyard of the palace. Aššur sits on his seat.
— Saturn stands in the halo of the moon.
If a planet is red: plenty for the people.
If Nergal in his appearance is clothed with leprosy: the Westlander will attack Akkad; the enemy will take the road and go to Akkad; the cattle of Akkad will perish in the steppe; dates and dates will not prosper; the gods will have mercy on Akkad.
... red, rear part;
Mercury is going to drop.
The vertebrae are recessed. The 'cavity' of the ... lung is split...
... his favourable omens. The gods Ea, Šamaš, Asalluḫi, Šakkan, (and) Adad, who dwell in the area of his shrine, are doing very well. The king, my lord, can be very glad indeed.
or ...
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
The king, my lord, who is the provider for this garden and the orchards of Aššur and the weapons of Mullissu, sits on the throne. He performs a sheep offering, performs a libation, (and) sings, “The king is the provider.”
Witness ... la...
The land of Dagunu ... ; the king, my lord, wrote
for not having ...
So that the foundation of the terrace might be secure, I made its plan larger than before and (thereby) I made its foundation as firm as a mountain. I had the gods Sîn and Šamaš look at it with their steady gaze. I made the gods of the gods, the Lahmu gods, enter into it and they took up residence on (their) eternal dais(es). I made the throne of my priestly office last forever and ever.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nammir. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord.
In the month Šer'i-mêto, the day of the (triumphal) entry into the palace, which is (normally) reserved for celebrating the (king’s) accession, I had (the palace) completely rebuilt for my royal residence.
Esarhaddon, fearless king of Assyria, the one who reveres the gods, the one who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the gods, am I —
and ...
This night, on the 5th day, the king ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Balasî. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Witness Nabû-eriba, deputy.
Witness Aya-adad, chariot driver.
4 ...
The front, Hanî;
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Itti-Adad-aninu.
I have finished the harvest in the city of Sarugi. I shall go and finish the harvest in the city of Birtunu, and afterwards I shall go and finish the harvest in the city of Kar-Apladad.
Seal of Adad-ahu-iddina, owner of the people being sold.
News of the house of Dala-mati-Aššur: he is staying in Nippur.
I have sent ...
... "
A tablet of Urzana to the palace herald. Good health to you!
... I built (and) completed (it) from its foundations to its crenellations... I deposited my clay cone.
... Mannu-ki-...
I rebuilt the city Tīda... I laid its foundations on top of the ruins of ... and I raised its superstructure. I built (and) completed (it) from its foundations to its battlements.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let the prelate of ... of the town of Meštu come and speak with them ... " — he did not come, but they sent ... , saying: "Let us go and ... "
Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, has contracted and bought him from Mannu-ki-Ninua for 17 1/2 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
He (Marduk-apla-iddina) plundered the land Bīt-Amukāni and took its people to Assyria. He killed Dukūnu (I), their king, in the city Sapia, a city of his.
... of my lord ...
From this very fact, the king my lord can see that his servant and the day of his house are safe.
From that among the towns ... lia, Birtu, the forts of Aššur-belu-taqqin, I have seized the house of the people of Lahiru, and I have taken out barley and piled it up there. I have also taken men from there.
Isana
May a later prince, whom Aššur names for shepherding the land and people, read aloud this inscription written in his (own) name, and may he anoint (it) with oil, make an offering, (and) place (it) with my inscribed object. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
... the king, my lord
If the star of Assyria is bright: the path of the sun ...
If Venus becomes visible in Sivan (III): the enemy will plunder.
Total 7, of Adad-...
Total 6 women.
... I have seen.
of the king from the country ...
... you did not guard me ...
Witness Ubru-... , mayor of Que.
to ...
... came ...
The officiant throws a cup of water and a cup of beer into the river. He throws in a purification device, and says: “Ištar, accept life!” He throws ... into the House of the Aššur Goddess, and says: “Ištar, accept life!” He throws in a purification device, and says: “Ištar, accept life!”
I laid its foundation(s) on top of (its) original foundation(s). I built (and) completed (it) from its foundations to its crenellations. I deposited my monumental inscription. May (the god) Aššur look with pleasure upon my work.
... fish
The 'well-being' is overturned and faces the gall bladder...
NN and his people, Tuqunu-ereš and his people, NN and his people,
This is a ... of the king, my lord. This is the tree which he wrote to the king, my lord.
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial audience gift from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
x jars of wine ...
Good health to my brother! May Aššur and Ešarra bless my brother!
... s ...
Perhaps the commandant of Babylon will write to the king, my lord, that the citizens of Babylon are being deported to the country. They have been deported because of the commandants' order that "they should bring the chariots and the silver to the citizens of Babylon, Borsippa and Cutha." The citizens of Babylon are not defecting; they are being deported. When the commandant captured the men from among them, he said: "My messengers are going to the country."
... is not ...
... ;
... against the Urarṭian, who had fled from the land Urarṭu to the land Šubria, and whom Ursâ, king of Urarṭu, had sent against him, and who had not feared his lordly majesty — I captured him alive from the land Šubria. I asked the great gods about his people and his army, and they informed me. I questioned him and he told me ... the whole land of the Urarṭian. I did not release him, I brought them back to their country.
... Let the king, my lord, ask whether what I said to the king, my lord, is true. The king's servants are saying: "The king should return and take care of the business of the king, my lord." I am not able to do it. Let one of the exorcists or the physicians appoint me to do it.
If the Scales' position is stable: there will be truth in the land.
who ... his staff
I destroyed (and) devastated the fortresses that Baʾalu, the king of the land Tyre, had built against Baʾalu, the king of the land Sidon. I captured him alive (and) brought him before me. I returned the women that he had taken to Assyria to Assyria.
Witness Usiî, cohort commander.
... my army. The ...
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "How many bull colossi have you made?" — they have made 10 ... and 10 ...
10 ditto, hallam;
Witness Šep-Aššur, ...
Now they are on their way to the king, my lord.
Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, who is now ill and on whom the 'hand' of god Šamaš is being 'placed' in extispicy —
2 talents, the fuller of the cloaks;
... ditto,
(As for) Baʾalu, the king of the land Tyre who did not honor my royal command(s), he erected fortresses against me. By sea and dry land, he made (them) impassable (and) turned (them) into a fortress.
Witness Uqur-ahhe.
When the messenger came to ... , he said: "I am a poor man. I have no field in Elam. I have taken the field of Hâ-iri ... , and he has given me ... , but nobody has sent a letter to the king, my lord, and I am dying of worry. The king, my lord, will hear my case. He will listen to what I have to say. The king, my lord, should know that the heart of Liphur-Bel is at ease. The king, my lord, can be glad.
I marched to the city Madaktu, his royal city. In the month Tebētu (X), the time of spring, they (the gods) ordered the defeat of the army of the land of the Šubaru, and they (the gods) allowed me to achieve my desire. I turned around (lit. “I turned the front of my yoke”) and took the road to Assyria.
As to the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let them be brought here" — let the bull colossi be brought here.
... the work ...
Witness Uburu-ram.
The king, my lord, should not be negligent about this matter. Let him send word that they should bring me the people of the Arabs, so I can interrogate them. This is a matter of evil, and we must not conceal it. We must not conceal it from Assurbanipal, the beloved of the god Enlil.
As long as he lives, he shall not change (his mind).
... the Urarṭian
After they had made them, I inspected them. I did not ... the one who had made them, Šamaš-šumu-ukin, the one who had made them, had become hostile to me. I did not ... Aššur-mukin-paleya, my brother, the one who had made them, the chief of the family, had become hostile to me before Aššur. Aššur-etel-šamê-erṣeti-muballissu, son of Aššur-etel-šamê-erṣeti
... he will finish the garments
The gods Aššur, Ṣirū, Šuruppa, Anu, Enlil, Ea, and Belet-ili, the great gods, the Igīgū gods, the Anunnakū gods, the gods of the netherworld, the Anunnakū gods, the gods of the underworld, the goddesses, the goddesses of the netherworld, the goddesses of the underworld, the goddesses of the netherworld, the goddesses of the underworld, the goddesses of the underworld, the god
... the king of Elam ...
Does your great divinity know it? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Disregard the (formulation) of the prayer for today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-belu-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! The city of Der and the fort are well.
He is ...
Total, ...
The salt and cress which you provide are ...
... who loves him, goes to the river ordeal, enters the reed hut which is being prepared for the ordeal, and sits down there.
... inspected
I destroyed that district (and) turned (it) into ruins. With the support of the great gods, I defeated my enemies (and) returned safely to Nineveh.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Witness Nabû-abu-uṣur, ...
Witness Silim-ili.
Samaria, ...
... in the side of ...
NN, donkey driver;
... of the city Kulmuḫu
... the 'hand' of god ...
... their words ...
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, unrivalled king of all princes, favorite of the great gods, guardian of truth who loves justice, renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the insubmissive, (and) the one who strikes enemies with lightning:
... I will not change. If ... who is not present, I will explain (it).
(As for) the rest of the Arabs who had fled from my weapons, Erra, the warrior, killed them with the sword. He hung their corpses on poles and placed (them) around their (own) villages. He made their flesh (and) the flesh of their sons, as well as the flesh of their nobles, (viii 10') (and) all of the great gods, my lords, (viii 15') an object of wonder.
Ditto by Sin, Šamaš, Adad and Marduk!
He said: "We will not go outdoors on the 10th of Ab (V)." We will go and take the 30 wagons. As soon as the 10th is over, we shall go and take the ...
If a planet becomes visible in ... : rain and flood will last long.
240 bows,
20 minas of black wool;
... and did not speak with us. If the king so orders,
Witness ... biaš.
1 seah 1 'litre' of regular offering loaves;
And let the king send a eunuch to ... , so he can appoint him over the fort.
I hitched up teams of horses that were trained to the yoke for the journey to the land of the Elamites. I advanced two leagues per day (and) marched for two days.
4 ... ;
... of Bit-Hamban ... the city Yakin ... they will kill, and ...
The king, my lord, knows that the tower of Marduk-šakin-šumi
The charge of the 'Lady of Cults' is doing very, very well; the king, my lord, can be very, very glad.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have seen fear and terror at night, or jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
a ditto of small onions;
... his fathers
And as to what my lord said: "The gods have become angry" — ... will give you ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Na'di-ilu. Good health to the king, my lord!
We kept watch on the 29th day; we did not see the moon. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king my lord!
... cavalry ...
5 ditto — Il-hari
I myself prayed to the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl, Nabû, Nergal, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela, the gods who support me, (and) (v 10) they immediately heeded my prayers and came to my aid.
... against the word of the king ... I ... my brothers ... and ...
If on the 14th day the moon and sun are seen together: reliable speech; the land will become happy; the gods will remember Akkad favorably.
I carried off 12,000 soldiers of the land of the Qutu, insubmissive Arameans, (and) settled (them) in the land of Sūḫu. I filled the plain with their blood (and) the countryside with their corpses.
... his ... s to the banquet
That silver is paid completely.
... have been given ...
... the army ...
Witness Busi-ilani, ditto.
Ever since the people of Hamath ... , they have come and gone back and forth to me. I have gone and brought these people to Borsippa ...
And they are telling me the words of the heart of Akkad. All is well.
Now then,, if it is agreeable to the king, my lord, let the king, my lord, send a messenger to Ma'umaya.
1 goose, 1 duck, 10 turtledoves.
To the king, my lord: your servant Akkullanu. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
From Nabû-šuma-iškun.
Palace of Sîn-šarra-iškun.
Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
I destroyed (and) devastated his cities, (and) turned (them) into ruins by the command of the god Gīra.
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, the one who (re)constructed the temple of the god Aššur, (re)built Esagil and Babylon, renewed the statues of the great gods, king of Egypt, king of the land Meluḫḫa, king of the four quarters (of the world), son of Sennacherib, king of the world (and) king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon
From the throne of Bel-Harran as far as the fort of Adad-remanni, from ... as far as Dur-Tukulti-Ninurta, x leagues x stretches x rods from the throne of Bel-Harran as far as Dur-Tukulti-Ninurra.
Witness Bel-...
I detained him
After Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, has gone to his fate, Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, will ascend the royal throne. He will exercise the kingship and lordship of Assyria over you. You shall not make common cause with anyone who may revolt against him, nor make common cause with anyone who may plot evil against him, nor set foot anywhere at all hostile to him, nor make common cause with anyone who may plot evil against him.
The god Aššur, the great lord, ... the god Anu, king of the Igīgū and Anunnakū gods, lord of the lands, the god Abu, ... , the one who makes the dead rise, ... the god Ea, king of the apsû, ... , the one who decrees destinies, ... who makes my kingship great, ... , ... I made ...
Whoever erases my inscribed name and writes his (own) name, or discards my inscribed name, may the goddess Ištar, mistress of war and battle, not come to his aid. May she not go to his aid in strife and battle. May she make his enemy prevail over him. May she not listen to his prayers. May she turn her face away from him. May she not accept his supplications. May she curse him angrily and destroy his life. May she make his name (and) his seed disappear from the land.
From Nabû'a of Assur.
... Nergal-... , son of Ana-Nabû-taklak
Witness ... -ilu, eunuch.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Where are the rest of the troops?" My major-domo is delayed; the rest of the troops are coming.
Nusku-duri, ... ; 2 women; a total of 3 people.
Nabû-ahu-uṣur, baker;
Total, 60 ...
The 'crucible' is present. The 'crucible' is like a ... and faces upward. If it faces upward, it will keep watch over the king and the man.
In the left side of the lung there is a 'foot'-mark. The top of the breast-bone is split...
... -kumua
Witness Zarutî, physician.
Witness Ahu-illika, servant of the chief eunuch.
a reed basket ...
The king should ask the 'head man' who sits opposite me. He has been sitting opposite me since last year.
Sukkaya;
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
The day before yesterday ... the prelate ... his messenger came to the king of Babylon. In Nisan (I) the prelate ... came to his presence. The bull was slaughtered and the god was seated. He did not say: "May the well-being of the king, my lord, be established." He sealed the seal of the temple of the god Humhum with the seal of the god Humhum which is in the tents of Esarhaddon, and he gave 1 talent 20 minas of gold and 1 talent of red wool to the king of Babylon through his
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur (and) the gods Šerua, Kippat-mati, Kippat-mati, Haya, Kusu, Nusku, (and) Bēlet-ilī, the gods of the house of Kidmuri, the gods Bēlet-ilī, Dugūa, Ningirsu, (and) Lugal-kamān, the great gods
stomachs, livers, kidneys, hearts.
The king, my lord, can be glad indeed.
In two chariots, care of Aššur-ahhe-eriba.
The Itu'eans whom I appointed to the garrison in Birtu have returned this favour to me. They have told the royal bodyguard:
... my messenger
Concerning Nabû-qati-ṣabat and Šamaš-... about whom the king, our lord, wrote to us: "...
To the king of the universe, my lord: your servant NN. May DNN bless the king, my lord, for many days.
This (omen) is from before Aššur.
Now let the king ask Arbayu here. Let him give orders to his servant.
I had a chariot of red gold, silver, (and) precious stones, a replica of the god Marduk, (i 5) the exalted lord of the gods, my lord, made for the god Marduk, king of the totality of heaven and netherworld, to be his eternal dwelling.
He shall have the usufruct of the field for three years and three fallow years.
7,000 (homers) of barley according to the seah of 6 'litres' at my disposal.
of Hazail, in all 2 men, servants of the lady of the house of the crown prince, owners of the man being sold.
I have written to the king, my lord, the ... of ...
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered 88 fortified cities, fortresses of Chaldea, together with 820 small(er) settlements in their environs.
10 shoots (of sesame);
The money is paid completely. That field, house, threshing floor and grove are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
From Ašaredu.
Ahiqar and the servants of Šarrat-kidmuri have delivered him to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, has written to me that the king has returned the body of the royal bodyguard whom the king, my lord, sent. The gods of the king, my lord, have given the field to the king, my lord.
The king came out. He performed sheep offerings and burnt offering. He offered fat oxen and fat sheep. He placed loaves of bread on the censers of the gods. He returned and kissed the ground. He poured oil, honey, beer and wine.
10 tablets ... ,
20, Assyrian, hand of the cupbearer;
He shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall give his soldiers back in full.
He performs a sheep offering, treats the god, and returns the god to the akītu-house.
Ubru-... , NN, Ahu-... , Se'-... , NN,
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who loves the god Aššur and the goddess Mullissu, the one who is assiduous towards their shrines, the one who is attentive to their command(s), the one who is assiduous towards their sanctuaries, the one who is attentive to their command(s), the one who is assiduous towards their sanctuaries, the one who is assiduous towards their sanctuaries, the one who provides for their sanctuaries, the one who renovates their
1, the village managers, at the disposal of Zarutî, cohort commander.
Witness Nabû-ahhe-iddina, baker.
horse trainers of the open chariotry;
Now then the Šubrian emissary is coming to the king, my lord. What should I tell the king, my lord, about their words?
The god Ninurta, the foremost heir, looked steadfastly upon me and made my heart greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises. He made the gods of the city Tarbiṣu, the god Adad, take the road to the god Nabû, their lord, and he made them take up their weapons.
The forts ...
x,000 stalks of vine near the city of Uppumu.
Witness Didî.
2 jerboas;
Month Iyyar (II), 26th day, eponym year of Gabbaru.
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the city ... tu, a royal city of the land Elam.
... who dwells in the underworld, does not fear the sword.
the governor of Calah ...
Qarrad-nipha,
One mina ... , servants of Bel-Harran-isse'a and Mannu-ki-... —
Witness Pulu, ditto.
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of Assyria, unrivalled king, pious shepherd who revere the great gods, guardian of truth who loves justice, renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the insubmissive, (and) the one who strikes enemies with lightning:
... I laid in the Gate of the Rising Sun. I made a statue of Zarpanitu, who wears a crown (with) stars, and I erected (it) there.
The bread of the inner sanctum of the House of Aššur and of all the temples is the responsibility of the chief baker of the House of Aššur.
1 ditto of šubû-stone for 1.
Witness Mušezib-Aššur, ...
... they are transporting
... this ...
Witness Se'-ila'i, ditto.
Palace of Sargon (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, favorite of the great gods;
I have heard the news of my lord; much ...
... and ...
... the king, the shepherd who reveres me, with the support of your mighty feet, I sat in a chair of safety and with my battle troops, I received tribute from the distant mountains.
... Šumma-šarri, chariot fighter
With the support of Aššur, my lord, I advanced from the city Tūšḫu. I brought across the Euphrates in flood. I conquered the cities Pitirra, their fortified city, which belonged to the city Dīrraia. I conquered the city Marṣiš, (which is) twenty-two fortresses, (and) I burnt it. With the support of Aššur, my lord, I brought about the defeat of the troops and army of the Arameans. In two days, I brought about the defeat of Š
... to Nisan (I)
... the chariot driver of the palace
The chief eunuch and the kings do not agree to give the feet of the king's servants until they have been paid in full. They are sitting on your throne, and they are waiting for the payment.
May my lord ... to his life! May my lord ... to Nergal and Laṣ! May my lord ... to the ... of Bit-Amban! May my lord ... to the king!
... them
... men and their property
You shall not plot evil, malicious or treacherous things against Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, nor make common cause with his enemy, nor with his uncles, nor with his brothers, nor with his cousins, nor with his prefects, nor with the rab-mūgi, nor with the emissaries of the land of the Qutu, nor with the emissaries of the land of the Šubaru, nor with any other enemy, nor with any other unfaith
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me:
... Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, will return the money tenfold to its owner.
1 gold ring, 15 1/3 shekels, 1 hand-ring, 32 1/3 shekels, Ahu-duri, son of NN;
... I ...
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments ...
Witness Akkudanu.
Šarri-nuri, farmer, 6 persons; Milki-nuri, farmer, x persons; NN, 15 persons;
Month Adar (XII), 12th day.
... he killed ...
... good, ...
Whatever my brother says, send (word)!
... as many as there are, let them summon and kill them. The lord knows that ... they are ... and are staying in their house. Let them ask him ...
in this city ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šarru-emuranni. Good health to the king, my lord!
From Nergal-eṭir.
... until now
4 females donkey-mares, for 32 shekels.
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
I am herewith sending to the king, my lord, one who has been made to guard the king's word.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Balaṭu-ereš or his sons or grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Mušallim-Issar,
Month Iyyar (II), 28th day, eponym year of Aššur-naṣir.
3 overcoats, the front red, ... ;
Witness Inurta-isse'a.
Thirty turtledoves.
... front
The seed of the land ... will be brought in, ... Sin and Nikkal ...
... the city ...
... the xth day;
I had mercy on him and spared his life. I had mercy on him and spared his life.
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract, whether Babilayu or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or his prefect or his neighbour, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against the woman of Borsippa,
This month is the (beginning of) the year. Let the king come and take the road. Let them perform the sacrifices and ...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the 4th day of this month, the month ... , to the 11th day of Sivan (III)
Bel-aplu-iddina sent his son to the house of Ibnâ, son of Nur-Sin, but he did not marry.
This is its interpretation.
... very
Šumma-ilani has contracted and bought it for x minas of silver.
... garments ... ;
NN, bodyguard of the queen mother;
... as follows
who with treachery ...
The great gods ... in the assembly of the gods ...
Witness Nabû-balassu-iqbi, baker.
Let the king send a scribe to Balṭi-Issar, and let him be placed over ... of the banquet.
Witness Kablu-Issar, rab sikkāti. Witness NN.
Total, of Aremu-Nabû-naši.
The coils of the colon are 14 in number.
... not ...
... or the ...
Naṣiru, the Elamite, who had previously been submissive to him, saw the might of the axe which had cut down the tree and ... , and ... his own land. He ... the might of Assyria, ... the might of Akkad, ...
Month Tishri (VII), 8th day, eponym year of Bel-Harran-shadua.
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Bel and Nabû bless the king, my lord!
The gate of ...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the ... th day of this month, the month ... of this year, to the 23rd day of Marchesvan (VIII) of this year, for ... days and nights, my stipulated term,
Aššur-nārārī, king of the universe, son of Aššur-dān (I) (who was) also king of the universe, son of Aššur-bēl-kala (I) (who was) also king of the universe:
Isî, the woman Atar-... , his wife, Banî, his son of 5 spans' height, Dâyanu, his son of x spans' height, Ramâ, his daughter, a total of 5 people —
NN, farmer, and his people.
Marduk-šumu-uṣur, Naṣiru and Tabnî ...
The son of Nikkal-iddin has written to the king of Elam and to Humbanigaš, saying: "... the king of Assyria and the camp ...
their prefect ...
Abi-ila'i,
... to the presence
I exercised authority over the extensive land of Karduniaš (Babylonia) ... I imposed tribute and payment on the chieftains of Chaldea.
Now then I am sending you to Dur-Šarruken. You will ... the bull colossi on your ... as ... as ...
... Nabû-na'id, king of Babylon, strong king, king of the universe, son of Nabû-balāssu-iqbi, king of Babylon, king of the universe, son of Nabû-balāssu-iqbi (I), king of Babylon, king of the universe.
I will ... , and I will ...
As to the news of Belšunu, the house of the Dakureans about which the king, my lord, wrote to me, the messenger whom I sent to him has not returned to him, and he has not spoken with him. As soon as I hear from him, I shall write to the king, my lord.
Concerning the troops about whom the king, my lord, wrote to his servant: "For how many days should they stay (here)?" —
If the moon becomes visible in Tebet (X) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour Subartu; a foreigner will rule the Westland.
... with Urad-...
He places a rib on the brazier, burns juniper and cedar,
At that time, I had a bridge constructed opposite the Citadel Gate with paving stones of white limestone and I named it “The Bridge of the Life of the King.”
... you fear ...
... days
2 talents of linen;
4 minas of silver, debts of Šamaš-ila'i, which he has paid to Sailu and Sailu on behalf of Šamaš-ila'i.
If a fog rolls in Shebat (XI): eclipse of the Kassites.
Seal of Šamaš-ku... ,
That which is (written) upon the ... of his (Marduk’s) ... , (and) which is (also) written upon the ... of his (Marduk’s) ...
A writing-board ...
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract, whether Nabû-eriba or the governor or the deputy, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation, shall pay 12 minas of silver.
Marduk-...
1, overseer(s) of the streets;
Concerning what the king wrote to us: "When you have finished building the house, finish the rest of the work and do it in the same way" — should we do it in the same way? Or should we do it in a different way?
In the future, when ... the great gods, my lords, ... , may they speak well of me ... in the inscribed object that I have made and may they bless the kings, my descendants.
You shall not change (anything) concerning (this) stele.
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me, the house of A...
On my second campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me so that I mustered my numerous troops (and) ordered the march to the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians, who since time immemorial had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors. In the high mountains, difficult terrain, I rode on horseback and had my personal chariot carried on (men’s) necks. In very rugged terrain I roamed about on foot like a wild bull.
king of the (four) quarters (of the world),
I put to the sword the population of the city Ḫirimmu, a dangerous enemy who since time immemorial had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors, and I did not leave one alive. I reorganized that district (and) imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the gods of Assyria, my lords.
which before me ...
I have been appointed to serve the king. May I see the king's face and may I be confident like the king.
Witness Barruqu, ditto.
and ...
... he
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
... have returned
... he is a carpenter. He is with ...
An estate of 40 hectares of sown land
17th day, eponym year of Ṣalmu-šarri-iqbi.
8 females, of 5 spans' height;
I have ... ed the seed corn
I am a servant of the king. If it is acceptable to
Šumma-Adad, ...
8 (cuts of) meat, the house of ... i;
Witness Sukkaya.
... the king, my lord, ...
Witness Aššur-šumu-uṣur.
... I conquered the land Nalḫu and (then) I destroyed the city ... -Aššur, (and) I brought the people of the lands that I had conquered therein. I annexed to Assyria the lands Sardurri, Lusia, (and) Sūbāia, together with the city Bīt-Zūʾa, fortresses of the land Urarṭu, (and) the cities in their environs.
I received ...
If the front of the gall bladder is red and its left side is white: the king will conquer a land not his own.
... of your house, NN
Nobody ... the daughter of Babâ ...
The city Akkad together with ...
... all ...
An estate of Nur-Dananu, chariot driver, at the disposal of Sa'ilâ, his son.
The officiant should not go near the river ... ; they should burn a female kid ...
Moreover, I made the cedar roof-beams that I had cut from the cedar forest(s) into the shape of the arrows that I had shot with the bow(s) (and) I installed (them) as a cornice for the entire palace. I surrounded the entire palace with slabs of alabaster (and) I filled (it) with splendor. I decorated (it) with silver and gold and made (it) shine like daylight.
Why does the king, our lord, say: "... seized ...
From Balasî.
Seal of Bel-tarṣi-ilumma, eunuch of Adad-nārārī, king of the universe, governor of the city Kalḫu, land Ḫamath, land Tērman, land Yaluna, (and) land Tabal.
Ebabbarra, “House of the fates”: the house of Gula, the house of the cupbearer.
x cans of beer;
... Now, as the king, my lord, commanded, "You shall release ... " — I am releasing them. Let them ... to the king, my lord. The moon, my lord, should decide whether from whom I have seen them. I have seen them from the king, my lord. If ... , let me release them. If not, let your gods not be in my hands.
May the gods who dwell in Arbela bless the king, my lord.
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, capable shepherd, circumspect ruler, (and) leader of a widespread population, I:
10 ditto, ... ;
The king of Babylon and the king of the land Elam saw the dust cloud of my expeditionary force, then they abandoned their chariots and fled alone.
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhe.
... of the daughter ...
Adad-nerari (III), overseer, son of Šamši-Adad (V), overseer, son of Shalmaneser (III), likewise overseer.
You, O Šamaš, great lord, look with pleasure upon this work and may a good word for me be set upon your lips! May the people of Akkad, who dwell in the territory between the city and the steppe, see the might of their shepherd and may they praise his name! May they stand by his side and protect him!
... the 'path' ...
Witness Ittiya, priest of Ninurta.
The palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of the universe, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of the universe: (brick) belonging to the temple of the king of the lands.
... and if ...
When they were killed, we ... to the king, our lord.
... you will be victorious.
15 minas, 1/2 mina ... ;
The enemies of the king, my lord, will constantly come to the presence of the king, my lord. What are the king's instructions?
Ninurta-duru-usur,
Now then ... the watch of his guard has been strengthened. His whole camp has been assembled, and all his roads are open. He will set out on his way and take the road to Bab-Musaṣi. They will go and bring him in, and he will be seated on the throne. You will seize him on all the roads.
An estate of x hectares of land
By the command of Aššur, I ...
If the moon at its appearance ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... your ... s
Witness Zar-Issar.
in accordance with the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord, and your favorable decisions, should the subject of this query, Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, strive and plan, and send NN to ... , and should he go to ... ? Is it pleasing to your great divinity?
To the king, my lord: your servant Inurta-belu-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord!
... the king, who is the great lord, the god Marduk, has greatly blessed me and ...
Witness Silim-Aššur, grand vizier.
to your presence ...
... pomegranates ...
Month Iyyar (II), 5th day, eponym year of NN.
... the rear of the house of Ilu-ahu-uṣur
Witness Nabû-rehtu-uṣur, cohort commander.
1, Tutî, village manager;
12 8, total 20 — ...
Witness Inurta-zeru-uṣur, scribe.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nadin-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk greatly bless the king, my lord!
Palace of Adad-nārārī, king of the universe, son of Arik-dīn-ili, king of Assyria: (brick) belonging to the ḫilāku-dais.
2 black horses,
The forts, temples and ... are well.
He shall pay one mina of silver.
... the day before yesterday ...
Seal of Se'-zabadi, owner of the woman being sold.
The gate opposite Aššur is the King’s Gate. The gate opposite its ziggurrat is the Gate of the Path of the Enlil-Stars. The gate is its ziggurrat. The 20th is the rest.
The king, my lord, should ask the (members) of the city council of Šabirešu whether I have not been coming to the feet of my chariot and my chariot has not been coming to the feet of my chariot-driver.
Month Iyyar (II), 24th day, eponym year of Nabû-šar-ahhešu, governor of Samaria.
... Ariye ...
x hectares of field in the town of ... , adjoining the field of Me'a-il, ... , and the field of the village of Qanâ;
6 minas, 2 bowls ... for bowls not ... ;
From Adad-šumu-uṣur.
... the governors ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ra'im-nišešu. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king!
I conquered the city Aššur-iddina by means of his (Ummanaldašu’s) reports.
... are many, and they are useful to you.
... -aplu-iddina, 2 persons; Urad-Nabû, 2 persons; Nabû-šabši, 7 persons;
2 ... ;
Whoever alters this tablet, or changes or erases this tablet, ... this treaty, or ... , may the god Aššur, king of the gods, and the great gods, my lords, ... , and may they overthrow the kingship of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, (and) may they overthrow the kingship of Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, (and) may they ... their seals, may they not guard you (pl.) in your lawsuit against your enemies,
... his ...
"I will speak up, I am a servant
... the left side room
The 20th day: let him kill a snake, he will reach the highest rank.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
7 homers 7 homers — (governor of) Calah;
84 83 82 ... 35 from the inner precinct ...
If the moon and sun are in balance: reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the world will make his throne last long.
... of the fort
When they are to be released, they will be brought to Immi and given bread and corn in the city of Bubana.
A bag of ... , a bowl of ... , a priest of Šarrat-nipha, a priest of the bēt ēqi, ...
Month Tebet (X), 25th day, eponym year of Mannu-ki-Adad.
they came, said to me:
... , ... huru ditto, Dari-Bel ditto, NN ... ,
... the land of the Qumānu as far as the land Melid, I conquered. I captured the city Ḫubuṣa... I returned and set up my stele. I conquered the city ... They ... to me. I ... who ... to me. I ... and ... I brought back to my land. I settled therein 2,000 captives of the land of the Qumānu. I made (them) carry baskets (of earth) and they made bricks.
The king, my lord, will catch ...
I had foundation inscriptions of silver, gold, bronze, lapis lazuli, alabaster, basalt, (and) antimony made, had (them) written in my name, (and) had (them) placed in their (the palatial halls’) doorjamb(s). I had the great hero, the god Marduk, (and) the deeds that I had done written on them and I placed (the inscriptions) in the foundations.
Ariyate
Concerning the fugitive Bel-iqiša, a citizen of Assyria, a man of 100 spans' height, who had fled to me to save his life, and (whom) the god Aššur had encouraged, may he not die! May he not be deported from the land of Assyria to his enemy! May he not fall into my hands! May he not be killed, may he not be captured, may he not be taken prisoner! May the god Aššur not abandon him! May he not be defeated! May he not be van
Bel-emuranni,
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Eltekeh (and) Tamnâ. I approached the city Ekron and I killed the governors (and) nobles who had committed crime(s) and hung their corpses on towers around the city; I counted the citizens who had committed the criminal acts as booty; (and) I commanded that the rest of them, (those) who were not guilty of crimes or wrongdoing, (to) whom no penalty was due, be allowed to go free.
If a planet ... is seen: rain and flood ...
Witness Šulmu-ahhe, royal bodyguard.
6 shekels of silver, Bahianu, for Hali-iqbi, in exchange.
Total 11 ...
Witness Kenî, ditto.
May they make my reign as firm as the foundation of the heavens.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ululayu. The best of health to the king, my lord! Assyria is well, the temples are well, all the king's forts are well. The king, my lord, can be glad indeed.
... Assyria ...
... of Ašpa-bari
I shall send ...
... "
... to the place of ... Assurbanipal ... I made stand ... I ... ed him ... in Egypt ... I said: “Whoever removes the ... of Assurbanipal ... , may Aššur ... his feet ... ”
5 mares:
The ... which ... I appointed to the deputy (governor) ... ; the rest of the ... of Aššur-... the legate of Ki... I appointed to the deputy (governor) in ...
... before Bel
Month Ab (V), 9th day.
The king will get angry with him, and his country will be destroyed; the lord of Elam will be humiliated.
Witness ... -ahhe.
The Hargeans ...
40 leagues, the path of the sun; 60 leagues, the path of the moon, which is inside the sun; Marduk, whose inside is the moon, ... to the east, the path of the lion which ...
Witness Nabû-šumu-... , scribe, keeper of the contract.
... they should not hold back
... of
... Palil-tu, ditto ...
... they have removed ...
... Aššur-etel-šamê-erṣeti-muballissu
The treasurer and the palace scribe have sinned against the treaty. They have taken 3 talents of pure gold and 4 talents of non-pure gold from the storehouse of the chief victualler, and have turned it into royal gold and royal jewellery. The king, my lord, should give orders to the treasurer and the palace scribe to give it back in full. Let them give it back in full and let them do the work.
The queen ... s the gods ...
total — the goddess of the Kidmuri temple.
If the moon is surrounded by a halo, and Regulus stands in it: in that year, women will give birth to male children.
The city Šummu-ḫim.
Seal of Sasî, owner of the man being sold.
News of the Babylonians: ...
... my lords in their midst ... I made them take an oath ... and they swore by the gods ... I returned them to their places and ...
The Egyptians ...
From Munnabitu.
Ulūlu (VI), the tenth day, eponymy of Banbâ, the deputy minister (sukkallu šanû) (676 BC).
adjoining ...
In the pass of the Akkadians ...
Witness Ubru-Nabû, keeper of the contract.
I destroyed the land of Ḫumbanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš I), the Elamite, (and) I burned with fire the land Karalla, the land Šurda, the city Kišesim, the city Ḫarḫar, the land Media, (and) the land Ellipi. I made the god Aššur rise above all of the lands (and) I made the land Mannea bow down at my feet.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû'a. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
The god Asarara, the goddess Manzaharban, the Igigi gods of heaven, the Anunnaki gods of earth, the twin (and) the third, the four lords of the underworld, the Anunnaki gods, the Weapons, the Dahiru, the Adad-gods, the ... , the Urimu gods,
Witness Hiriṣayu.
May the lord of kings, for two days ... , stay in Šapanzipal! And may ... in the steppe!
... Esaggil, Babylon and ...
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Zazaya.
Witness NN, ... of the chariot.
Now ... ru-ramâ
If the moon at its appearance is red and its left horn is pointed, its right horn blunt: you will conquer a foreign land; Adad will devastate.
Instead of the interest he shall pay 15 shekels of silver.
(Property) of Šamaš-killanni, eunuch of the king.
Palace of Sennacherib, king of Assyria: (This is) the audience gift that Karib-il, king of the land Saba, presented to me. May (the gods) Šamaš, ... , Nabû, (and) Uraš make his name (and) his seed disappear.
... in Der
Ahi-yababa has contracted and bought it for x hundred copper shekels as a pledge from the captives of the vizier, on a boat. He has given it to the deputy.
An estate of 1 hectare 2 decares adjoining ditto, adjoining Marduk-ereš;
We kept watch on the 29th day; we saw the moon. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king my lord!
in all, 6: the 'residences' of ...
... the city Ḫatarikka, the city Ṣupat
At the beginning of my reign, I brought about the defeat of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), king of Karduniaš (Babylonia), together with the troops of (the land) Elam, at the battlefield of Kish. In the midst of that battle he fled alone and escaped to the land Guzummānu. I crossed the Euphrates and Ulāya Rivers, difficult waters, (and) I drove back like sheep the chariots, wagons, horses, mules, donkeys,
to Ilu-šumu-...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-metu-uballiṭ. The very best of health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk very greatly bless the king, my lord!
... there is a ... on them
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-belu-taqqin. Good health to the king, my lord!
4 minas of silver, 3 togas, 3 tunics: the chief eunuch;
2 ...
... here
Now ...
... of the meal
Month Elul (VI), 20th day, eponym year of Šarru-metu-uballiṭ.
... in the pass
... he did not have. The ... of the city ... was destroyed and burned, and ... the ziggurat ... which ... he plundered.
... the town of Šumma-... -ila'i
... ;
When he had made the ... disappear, he said:
Concerning the reinforcements about which the king, my lord, wrote to me, when I saw the letter of Bel and Nabû, I placed the crown on the king's head, and put a dagger in his hand. Now I am waiting for the rest of the reinforcements.
... we shall send
... 20 hectares ...
... Assyria
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
On my second campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me so that I mustered my numerous troops and ordered the march to the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians, a dangerous enemy who since time immemorial had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors. In the high mountains, difficult terrain, I rode on horseback and had my personal chariot carried on (men’s) necks. In very rugged terrain I roamed about on foot like a wild bull.
Witness Ilu-šumu-ka''in, chariot fighter of the governor.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
... concerning ...
Witness Aššur-...
The queen shall come and take her daughter, and I shall give (her) a cup of fig-beer.
Lâbaši-lipušu is a competent scribe; he is useful to the king, my lord.
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial audience gift from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
... the canal
... I had them dragged before me and I had (them) kiss my feet. I received from them twenty talents of gold, ... , garments with multi-colored trim, eunuchs, male singers, female singers, ... , horses of Egypt ...
The king asked me: "What is it that you are doing?" I said: "What ... the gods are doing ... Gula of ... Gula of the steppe ...
4 litres of honey ...
Witness Silim-Aššur, horse trainer.
... ;
Let the king, my lord, send word that their prefects should come and stay with me until these logs arrive.
From Rašil the older, servant of the king.
Total, (of the) commander-in-chief of the left.
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... I gave to Bel ...
130 ... ;
Thus (speaks) the goddess Bēlet-balaṭi, the lady of battle, the warrior of the gods, the mother of those who in the presence of the god Aššur, her father, was created to be a good thing, (and) who, with her pure gaze, prays to the king, her lord: “Teumman, the king of the land Elam, who sinned against the god Aššur, king of the gods, her father, and committed a crime, has become ill with a grievous disease. May he not go to Assy
When the king, my lord, asked his servant about the house, whether it is a house of straw or of oil, I stood before the king, my lord, and said: "It is a house of straw."
Month Adar (XII), 7th day, eponym year of Abi-ram, grand vizier.
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur.
As soon as I heard ...
Bel-dan,
The people of his city will be exempt.
He built anew Etemenanki, for his life, and for the life of his city.
Concerning the news of the king, my lord, I have arrested all my prelates and gone to see the mother of the king.
... my border
Tribute from the land of the people of Ḫabḫu.
did not come ...
Shalmaneser, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (I), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of Aššur: builder of Ekur, the temple of the gods.
Concerning the watch about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "NN is keeping watch over the crown prince" —
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have seen fear and terror at night, have changed or altered the proceedings, (or that) the oracle query has become jumbled and impaired in my mouth...
Samsi... , his maid, son, ... s;
... his ... , ... my reign, ... my deeds, ... the god ... , the mother of the wide underworld, ... Esarhaddon, true shepherd ... Akitu House, ...
A piece of lapis lazuli was set in a wooden base and was firmly fixed therein.
... his army ...
... their fields ...
... the king ...
I appointed two guards and two ... s in their charge. I told them: "Take care of their bread, but don't touch the ... !"
... they have gone ...
Disregard that they (may) seize them for their own purposes...
As to what the king of all lands, my lord, wrote: "Go and see where ... is being built" —
Your servant Nabû-bel-šumati: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: I have sent my messenger to greet the king, the horses and the troops.
The sun which (is) eclipsed is the moon, which is in front of the king. They have made it disappear.
... fish
A tablet of Aššur-zeru-ibni to Nergal-eṭir. Good health to my brother!
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. The best of health to the king, my lord!
x hectares of field in the town of Paranu, adjoining the road of Calah, adjoining the field of Aya-metunu, and adjoining the canal —
Will Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, be troubled and angry? Does your great divinity know it?
... the king, our lord
Witness Batudanu, scribe.
... they shall glaze the bricks.
of ...
... I will not change. The lord ...
Let their messenger come ...
Month ... , 1st day, the moon is seen.
(As for) Uaiteʾ (Iautaʾ), together with his troops, who had not feared the weapons of (the god) Aššur, my lord, and had plundered the land of the people of Nanû, the god Erra became angry with them and inflicted a defeat on them. He carried off their sons, their possessions, (and) their property, as well as their (own) gods, and he did not show mercy to them. He brought (them) into the temple(s) of the gods Aššur, Sîn,
After I had made the foundation(s) secure, I had a canebrake planted along the course of the canal. I had ... of the canal dug out and I had its foundation(s) made as secure as a mountain. I had four canebreaks planted along the course of the canal for the protection of my path. I had their weapons raised up like the horns of the Anzû-birds.
in the temple ...
... outside
(               Break               )
Will they kill what there is to kill, plunder what there is to plunder, loot what there is to loot, and take what there is to take?
Marduk, prince of the gods, lord of the Igīgū and Anunnakū gods, king of the Ḫittites, king of the Anunnakū gods, king of the īpuš-priests, king of the ēntu-priests, king of the great gods, king of the Ištar of Nineveh, king of the ēntu-priests of heaven and underworld, who makes opposing forces agree,
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether the queen or the palace women, or anyone else, breaks the contract, whether the one who wrote this seal or the one who reads it, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against the queen, shall drink wine in the midst of the sea, and shall not come to the presence of the goddess Anunnaki.
Your servant Ašaredu: I would gladly die for the king of the lands, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king of the lands, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
Concerning the ...
... will be placed ...
The former ... of the king, my lord, is a good one.
I am the one who knows how to revere the gods; the sun rises and sets in peace. I am the one who makes their ... s shine forth; I am the one who makes their ... s radiant.
Intercalary Adar (XII), ... th day, eponymy of ... , governor of ...
... set to ...
to ...
and ... with them ...
... Nabû-killanni
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, may Aššur, Sin, Šamaš, Bel and Nabû, the gods of the king, call him to account.
Witness Nabû-nammir, ...
Now then I have sent Esarhaddon, my king, with four hundred Assyrian troops. I have captured your enemy, and the people who are with you are dying of hunger.
... before me
Witness NN, scribe.
The king, my lord, can be glad. This ...
To the king, my lord: your servant, the foreman of the college of ten (scribes) of Arbela. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I am here; I will come and ...
52 in all from Arpad;
... are recessed ... 3 2-year-olds
I have written ...
To the governor, my lord: your servant Nabû-duru-uṣur. Good health to my lord! The city of Der is well.
... I will do the work ...
... will become strong and overthrow the land of Akkad in the steppe.
Witness NN, scribe.
In the future, in days to come, may a later prince, when that temple becomes dilapidated and he rebuilds (it), anoint with oil my monumental inscription, make sacrifices, (and) return (it) to its place. (Then) the god Nabû, the august heir, will listen to his prayers.
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
The gods Aššur, Nabû, (and) Marduk granted me a reign without equal and exalted my good reputation to the heights.
Nergal-iddina, a total of 20 persons, a servant of Arrapha; ... ; NN, ... ;
... to Nineveh ... adjoining the main ...
In the future, in days to come, may a later prince, when that wall becomes dilapidated and he rebuilds (it), restore my monumental inscriptions and my inscribed name to their places. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
At that time, in my city Kār-Tukultī-Ninurta, I built anew Etemenanki, the ziggurrat, for the dwelling of the god Aššur, my lord, (and) I named it Eḫulḫul. I made (it) larger than before, (and) I raised (its top) up like a mountain. I made the temple of the god Aššur, my lord, enter into it (and) I deposited my monumental inscriptions.
... s have been plundered in the house of ...
... the king, my lord
... I said to him
Zeru-ukin has given to Ahu-iddina.
... the king, my lord, ...
to NN ...
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
Witness ... ga-ṣabat. Witness Arakki.
... I filled with terror. The hands of ... Egypt, the land Ḫatti, ... I laid low. I ... the land Karalla, the land of the five (senses), ... I burned with fire. I ...
1, the daughter of the chief ... ;
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Witness Izbu, butcher.
The people of Šibirtu have been telling me that the house of Huhhitu and the threshing floor have been plundered. They have given me 20 (items):
Aššur-ila'i,
cure of ...
1, the scribe Uznâ;
... field ... in Šabirešu — not ...
It shall increase by a fourth.
Witness Aššur-le'i, ...
Šamaš-ila'i, chief ... , has contracted and bought it from Lu-balaṭ, ...
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, (i 5) capable shepherd, (and) leader of a widespread population, the one who fashioned image(s) of the deities (and) made (them) dwell in their sanctuaries, (i 10) the one who renovated the sanctuaries of the gods of the (cult) centers, (and) made (them) enter into (their respective tem
x male sheep — Se'-lahṭi, chief shepherd, son of the commander-in-chief;
Eight ... s of ... have delivered ... to the king, my lord.
(As for) Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, (my) hostile brother who had planned to take away Assyria for himself and had uttered grievous blasphem(ies) against the god Aššur, the god who created me, he (the god Aššur) made his mind evil and he (Šamaš-šuma-ukīn) passed away.
Your servant Hamatpâ: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to my lord:
Month Kislev (IX), 3rd day, eponym year of Sennacherib.
Witness ... -zeri. Witness ... , queen.
5 cans of beer;
These gods are loyal to Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, and Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, and his brothers, sons by the same mother as Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, and the rest of the offspring of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, (and) they will speak favorable things about him and his offspring before his enemy.
I am waiting for him ... ; as soon as he comes to me, I shall release him to the king, my lord.
At that time the temple of the god Nabû, which Adad-nārārī (I), son of Šamšī-Adad (V), king of Assyria, a king who preceded me, had previously built, had become dilapidated and old. I removed its dilapidated section(s) and (then) I made a plan for its renovation. I built (and) completed (it) from its foundation(s) to its crenellations. I roofed it with long beams of cedar. I decorated it more splend
... the town Gabbaru, I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire.
... are left
x+23 persons, ... , cohort commander ... ;
Witness Remanni-Adad, carpenter.
From Dur-Šarruken.
3 ditto of copper;
Concerning Aššur-rēša-iši ...
Witness Nergal-šarru-uṣur, 'third man.'
... are at the disposal of the 'weapon'-mark.
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods:
shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
They are staying in Sadiru; as soon as we have ... , we shall go to ...
One of the officials who brought him into the temple, and the vessels of gold which ... , the king's ... , has been stationed on the father of the king. Now one of the king's sons is standing before Bel, and he is drinking wine. The wine of the palace is now being poured out. The king's father is lying down, and the wine is being poured out.
... as follows: "This village is exempt, the whole town is exempt.
before the gods ...
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, ask him whatever his case is.
3 ... ;
You place a bowl before Šamaš, pour a libation of beer ...
(               Break               )
May they (= all the gods) make you attain your wish.
... in the hands of my messenger
The king, my lord, said: "It is not a good sign. You are not to go to the house of Aplaya, the son of Nadinu, and to have him perform the extispicy."
Witness Pan-Issar-lamur.
... and ...
I (re)built Eḫulḫul, the cella of the goddess Ištar, my lady, which is inside Eanna, which a former king had built, and I made its construction more splendid than before. I made the ziggurrat higher than before and I raised its top. I made the offerings more plentiful and I presented my gift(s).
Witness Nabû-eriba, deputy team commander.
You shall not sin against this treaty of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, which is (written) on Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, and his brothers, sons by the same mother as Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, and the rest of the offspring of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord.
Haya, Kusu in the side room, the Scales in the courtyard, Kittu in the courtyard, Ea-šarru in the well, Damkina, Gula, Malik, Uqur: total (of gods) in the house of Ea-šarru.
I built a house in the citadel of Nineveh, behind the temple of the gods Sîn and Šamaš, for the residence of the king, my lord, which Esarhaddon, my forefather, son of Nabû-balāssu-iqbi, had built.
From this day, the 10th day of this month, the month ... , to the ... th day of the month ... of this year, for 30 days and nights, my stipulated term —
Disregard that they (may) go down to the river and to the city Ashkelon ...
Witness Balasî, ...
which they killed ...
I have not seen and I have not heard.
x camels, 30 oxen,
... rings of gold ...
An estate of 40 (hectares of) land in the town of ...
The rest of the property of Nabû-šumu-iškun and Adad-... , which they gave to Bel-duri, the governor, and to Šakil-Aya.
... you do not know. Your ... and your heart are full of lies. Who has strengthened you? Nobody has given you anything.
The 12th day: he will be shut up in a prison.
1, (governor of) Calah;
If he does not pay, he shall give a donkey in its place to Adad-bel-na'id.
Month ... , xth day, eponym year of Manzarnê, ... of the vizier.
84 pairs of sandals for 2 minas and 53 shekels of silver from Kummuh, which the merchants did not bring in.
3 2-seah jars of hinhinu-seeds;
his sons ...
... according to this ...
Month Shebat (XI), 1st day, eponym year of Zazakku.
I will go as far as the border and enter (it).
... before ...
... 10 — (province of) Ad...
The man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, who has appealed to Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, your servant, concerning the harmāku-personnel, saying: "...
Witness Namû.
I put to the sword the population of the city Ḫirimmu, a dangerous enemy, and I did not spare a single one. I hung their corpses on poles and placed (them) around the city. I reorganized that district (and) imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the gods of Assyria, my lords.
2 cuts of shoulder from an ox of the temple of Dagan — of the chief cupbearer.
I gave ...
Month Adar (XII), 18th day.
Whoever breaks the contract, the king, my lord, should know (this).
... in ... , when the king's command ... , may the king not go out and may he not turn back! May the king, my lord, command that I should not go to the palace of the king, my lord, and may the king, my lord, send me with his servants so that I may hear the king's kind words and may I be able to speak with the Babylonians, my brothers.
Puzî;
... ditto,
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
... adjoining the road that leads to the village of ... ,
... chariot, 2 ...
This is its interpretation.
... is placed in front of the middle ...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, should send Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the rab mūgi, against Ikkalû,
Ištar, lady ... , ... ,
May Palil, the foremost wife, make your flesh and your offspring disappear.
Total 4 ...
... in my presence
adjoining the field of Gambulayu,
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. The best of health to the king, my lord!
As to the news of the city of Ashur, he is the one who ... whom the king, my lord, sent. Mukin-zeri ...
On the ... th day he returned and wrote to the king of Elam: "... my messenger ... to Bit-Bunakki. He says: 'NN, son of Umman-minâ, ... to Barsipal. He says: 'The king of Elam is coming to Bit-Bunakki. His chariots are with the king in Bit-Bunakki.'
Now ...
9 Kassite women;
As to the Qutian chariot-owners about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Ask them!" — there are no bread, no seed and no fodder for them.
1, (governor of) Hatarikka;
... is split. In ...
2 homers of barley — the gods.
Tell the governor of Calah to send word that they should set up the cedar and place it in the meadow of Ubasê.
shall place 10 minas of silver (and) x minas of gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
35 homers, the wine master;
From Pan-Marduk.
1 mina, Nabû-... ;
40 ditto of huhhurtu-type bread loaves;
The princes who had come to the aid of the lands, and the Lihu'eans, the Hamureans, and the whole of the land of Cimmeria, saying: "We will not let the city be destroyed," they set up a camp before the city and said to one another:
To the vizier, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. Good health to the vizier, my lord!
Witness Ilumma-le'i.
6 oxen, 40 hectares of arable land near the city of Harran, 100 hectares under cultivation therein.
... is complete
... the weapon of the first-ranking ...
The charge of the high priest to the crown prince is doing very well. We do not intercalate for Šamaš-šumu-ukin. What is it that the king, my lord, commands?
To the king, my lord: your servant Šulmu-beli. Good health to the king, my lord!
Arbakku of the land Arnasi,
or in ... ,
Witness Zababa-eriba, 'third man.'
in ...
Concerning the tribute horses of the king, my lord, ... the king, my lord, ...
Aššur sets out ...
... the sign ...
... farmer ... ; 1 woman; 1 house; ... the town Balihu.
x, in the charge of Huda-Dada,
... Sivan (III) ...
... before them
... the governors
... their ... s in ...
The king should know that your servants have been sold for money.
... Bēlat-ekalli
... I will go to Sūḫu
... of Nabû-šarru-ka''in ...
... before ... Aššur-rēša-iši ... to his entirety ... his wrath ...
The king, my lord, can be glad indeed about the fort. He has made the men enter it.
... this ...
... to the sons of Zazî
1 grove,
I have been waiting for the king, my lord, since last year.
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, and (then) I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, fortified cities, together with the small(er) settlements in their environs (and) the district of the land Bīt-Barrû in its entirety, and I added (
Guzana
If a star stands in the left side of the moon: the king of Akkad will exercise world rule.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
x ... , first fruits;
... the life of the king, my lord, is long.
... Arbela
x talents 4 1/2 minas of lapis lazuli;
a cup of ... ;
... concerning the Assyrians ...
... they will bless him
10 shekels of silver belonging to Urda-Aya, at the disposal of Kitti-muti.
... ayu, governor;
Month of the Opening of the Door, eponymy of Atar-ili, governor of the city Laḫīru (673 BC).
10 minas of silver ...
... I ... the god Šamaš ... I set in motion ... my foot ...
... Now he has run away with ... and come ... ; he has ... ed the chief ...
... the king, my lord, ...
Witness Haldi-naṣir, royal bodyguard.
Your servant Salamanu: I would gladly die for the palace of the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: The land of the king is well.
I decorated them (the palatial halls) in a splendid fashion. I adorned them with silver (and) copper knobbed nails. I adorned the arches, friezes, and all of their copings with baked bricks (glazed in the color of) obsidian (and) lapis lazuli.
... Saya, Marduk-šumu-uṣur. Month ...
of Ammu-la-Balaṭ ...
If Venus disappears in the west in Ab (V): there will be a fall of Elam ...
In the days of ...
... is finished. The rest
May Anu, Enlil and Ea, the great gods, who dwell in Esagil, which you love, curse you with a painful curse.
The rest of the ...
From Nabû-iqbi.
x, (with) 'foot'-mark, 14 'bones' (and) 30 'joints';
... seized ...
... ši-duri, his son,
Witness Aššur-le'i, 'third man.'
Issar-ša...
The (inscription) on the house of the crown prince of the Succession Palace, the house of the left hand, which is on the house of the Succession Palace, belonging to Remanni-Aššur, which Aššur-rēša-iši (I) made.
Milki-Adad
... Se'-abu, ...
The lady of his palace will go out to pay her respects to Hatti and Elam.
That which is (written) upon the skin of the necklace of the two lions.
... chariot ...
... these
... the king, my lord
... rebellion
... the ... s of ... are glad ...
1 sheep for ablution — of the ...
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
The king should do as he deems best.
Sagibî, ... ;
will Kaštaritu, city lord of Karkaššî, or Dusanni, the Sapardean, or the Cimmerians, or the Medes, or the Manneans, or any other enemy capture that city, and will they, as long as they are in the district of Karduniaš (Babylonia), march about wherever they wish?
... house ...
At the beginning of my reign, in my first regnal year, when the god Aššur, king of the gods, made me sit on the throne of my father, the god Anu, the creator of the universe, the god Enlil, the bearer of his throne, the god Ninurta, the bearer of his weapon, the god Nergal, the judge of the land, the one who makes the land prosper, and the goddess Bēlet-ilī, the bearer of his weapon, the goddess Ningal, the queen, the one who makes the land
On the first day ... Nergal, the lord of the ... , came forth and ... I was alive. I bless the king of the lands, my lord, every day. I kiss the feet of the king of the lands in Babylon.
... seah of 8 'litres'
In the course of their (the gods’) exalted journey, they (the gods) became angry and furious. The people living in the city were frightened by the clangor of their (the gods’) battle array. The terrifying radiance of their fierce battle, which cannot be withstood, overwhelmed the people ... the living ...
Disregard that ...
(As for) the one who alters (my) work, may the god Aššur, my lord, overthrow his sovereignty (and) destroy his name and his seed from the land.
I shall lay it down ...
The king, my lord, has remembered the one who has served him for many years. The one who has kept the king's word in his heart, and has constantly sought out good deeds, (and) who has not changed his mind since the days of his childhood.
By means of a reed basket, I crossed over (the river).
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
... the king, my lord, should ...
... Bit-Kisiya
... palace ... he ... the people of the cities ... not to be changed ... to Nineveh ... between ... as in ... he made the land happy ... he established their ...
... as far as the river
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "What news of the son of Zerî is there?" He has gone to Puqudu and returned. He has now returned to Uruk. My messenger has gone to Sapia and met him. I shall send a detailed report to the king, my lord, as soon as he has returned.
... we kept watch
In the middle surface of the 'finger' there is a hole. The right side of the 'finger' drags towards the left.
x minas of silver, of Ilu-dalâ, deputy of Haurina.
Whoever seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Remanni-Adad, chariot driver, his sons (and) his grandsons, shall place one talent of refined silver and one mina of pure gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his non-lawsuit and not succeed.
Witness Nabû-šezib, chariot driver.
... I said to him, "...
Written according to the original and collated.
Total 589 horses, 8 mules.
Palace of Sargon (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad.
Should Assurbanipal, the crown prince of the Succession Palace, strive and plan? Is it pleasing to your great divinity?
If Venus is low and dark: the days of the king will be long.
The one who is assiduous towards their shrines, who makes abundant the offerings to the gods, who provides for the cult centers, (and) who is assiduous towards their sanctuaries —
Why ...
14 ... ;
Nabû-šar-ahhešu;
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, scribe.
... you should have given me. If it is agreeable to the king, my lord, let me appoint ... in Akkad. If not, let the eunuch ... this work ... and the corn taxes ... and the straw taxes ...
Now they have sent me a sealed message in the (king's) presence. How should I act?
He shall place two minas of silver upon the corn heap, and shall redeem his field.
8 'litres' ...
Now then the whole city is united against Ariye. They are plotting to kill the legate.
I am sending ...
And ... for the ... of the temple of Ištar, for the temple of the Sebetti, for the temple of the Seven Gods, for the temple of Adad of the Kidmuri, for the temple of Adad of the Kidmuri, for the temple of the Seven Gods, for the temple of the Sebetti, for the temple of the Sebetti, for the temple of the Pleiades, for the temple of the Pleiades, for the temple of the Sebetti, for the temple of the Sebetti, for the temple of the Pleiades, for
The Medes ...
I took the people of the land Amurru into my hands (and) I brought to Elam the chariots, troops, (and) equipment of the land Amurru that had not been turned over to the chariots and troops (and) that had not been given to the land Urarṭu. I conquered, destroyed, devastated, (and) burned the cities Libê, their fortified city, (and) the cities Tarura, Abqu, Aruru, (and) Aruru-dēri, which are between Mount Uri, the land Arunu,
You place a libation bowl on the terrace ... , pour water, and sing, “The cupbearer is the king.” You place a libation bowl of a cup of water, sing, “The king is the cupbearer.”
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-šumu-ukin. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I had my camp pitched at the city Susa, then I brought forth my great army like a flood against the land Urarṭu. I set up camp against them (and) they (the Urarṭians) became frightened of the clangor of my weapons. (10) They brought to me as a gift the ... of Urzana, the king of the land Urarṭu, and they kissed my feet. I received from them the tribute of the people of the city Susa, which they had withheld from the god Aššur. I carried off as booty the
Se'-dalâ,
... of the report of the king ...
Witness Mannu-ki-Ninua, ...
Now then
If the moon and sun are in opposition: there will be truth in the land, and the son will speak the truth with his father.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether these men or their sons or grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Kakkullanu and his sons,
Witness Nabû-šallimšunu.
News of ...
(As for) Umba-Lagabua, who sat on the throne of the land Elam in opposition to Ummanaldašu (Ḫumban-ḫaltaš III), he heard about the conquest of the city Bubilu, a city that was a lordly residence of his, and fear fell upon him. He released the bonds of the prisoners (and) let the ropes of the captives go slack.
From the city ... u and the city ...
To the goddess Ištar, mistress of the lands, the queen of the gods, the 'water-of-life' ... , the lady of battle, the one who rides the great mountain ... , the one who is clothed with awe-inspiring radiance ... , the one who is clothed with awe-inspiring radiance ... , the one who is clothed with awe-inspiring radiance ... , the one who is clothed with awe-inspiring radiance ... , the one who is clothed with awe-
On the 18th day the king went down to the House of God.
... many ... s have been sold for money.
To the king of the lands, my lord: your servant Bel-ušezib. May Bel, Nabû and Šamaš bless the king, my lord!
... Marduk-aplu-iddina from ...
x straight garments, ditto, the edging ... ;
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
The city-lord ... has taken away the houses, saying: "Why did you not tell me that ... was with me?" Their houses have not been demolished."
his scribe.
... goes
I will go to the king my lord's presence tomorrow. He will come into my presence and stand before me. The king, my lord, may ask him where the house of Uqayu is located. He will tell the chief cupbearer that he has built a house there. What is it that he says?
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Total 71 — (province of) Nineveh.
Disregard that the day is overcast and it has rained ...
x men ...
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
... Ištar ...
Nabû-šarru-uṣur says: "...
Seal of Nabû-šallim-ahhe, son of Pan-Nabû-ṭemi,
If Venus comes close to Jupiter: the king of the Westland will become strong and overthrow the enemy; the enemy will plunder the land of the king's brother; ...
In Kislev (IX), on the 15th day, let Nergal take up a position of peace and sit down in his road.
... a bull colossus
The money is paid completely. That woman is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Total, 6 ...
May Anu, the father of the gods, break his scepter, may Enlil, lord of the fates, decree a fate without equal, may the days of his life be short, may his years be few, may his years be numbered (lit. “written”) as if (they were) days.
1, mayor of Arbela;
200 ditto, kirrutu-meal;
Witness ...
former ...
... Now ...
... , gardener of the vineyard; ...
If on the 16th day the moon and sun are seen together: one king will send hostile messages to another; the king will be shut up in his palace for the length of a month; the step of the enemy will be set towards his land; the enemy will march around victoriously.
If Adad thunders at its left horn: there will be an eclipse of the Westland; the king of the Westland will fall.
The gate of the upper city ...
... his people
This night the moon was surrounded by a halo, Scorpius stood in it.
10 hectares, the town of ... ;
Sasû, his servant —
x hectares of land in Kuluna;
Jupiter stood in the sky for a long time.
From Bulluṭu.
Kamanu, his servant, a Tabalean;
... saw ...
... ;
With joy and jubilation, I marched triumphantly throughout all of the extensive land of the Qutu. I had my camp pitched at the foot of Mount Luššušu, a rugged mountain.
... on the xth day let them give out food offerings ...
2 ditto ditto, the front ditto, knotted, 1 1/4 mina;
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have seen fear and terror at night, have altered or changed the proceedings, or jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, conqueror of the land of the Qutu, the land of the Uqāya, and all of the lands of the Ḫittites; valiant man who acts with the support of the god Aššur and the great gods, and has no rival among the princes of the four quarters; the one who subdued the lands Nairi (and) the land Bīt-Ḫamban; the one who brought about the defeat of the lands
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also king of the world (and) king of Assyria: conqueror from the passes of Mount Habruru to the land Gilzānu. Crossed the Tigris from the source to the land Šubria. (10) (and) conquered the entire
... who did not submit to the kings, my ancestors, and did not send his message to them, ... the territory of the land Ḫatti, and (thereby) disregarded the oath(s sworn) by (the god) Aššur, my lord, and (thereby) sided with his envoys, who had incited the servants to rebel against the city Kalḫu, (and) who had taken away (its) possessions.
Witness Ilu-remanni.
... Milki-suri... , his wife
The adjutant(s) who brought them in have been killed.
On the second day, after I had ... ed ... ,
Month Tammuz (IV), 22nd day, in Adian.
Month ... , 8th day, eponym year of Aššur-da''inanni.
Total 78 men ...
Tribute of Kutti-Aššur, the Kummuḫian, Raḫiānu, the Damascene, Meʾin-ḫimme of the city Samaria, Ḫirum, the Tyrean, Sibitti of the city Carchemish, Eni-il, the Ḫamatite, Parni of the city Šagarakti, Uriakki of the land Que, Pisīri of the city Carchemish, Eni-il of the city Ḫamat, Parni
Written according to the original and collated.
My brother has written to me from my men: the 'third man' is coming. He has not yet arrived in my presence, but the rest of the troops of the city-lords are at my disposal.
The base of the middle part is 'bound.' The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
... I said: "...
1 ring, 9 mares:
... them ...
... to his brother ...
The servants of the king are in the house of ... ; they have ... to the governor.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, have jumbled the oracle query in my mouth, or changed (or) altered the proceedings...
Now ...
... have run away
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ahhe-eriba. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
La-qepu ...
... ;
I will not ... the ... , I will not ... the ... ; I will not release him to go out.
Let the king ask the deputy of ... : "Why did the king give me ... ? Let me see his good days!"
Witness Banitu. Witness Urda-Nanaya.
... the 7th day is good, the 8th day ...
The god Aššur, the god Šamaš, the god Adad, the god Ber, ... , the god Aššur, my lord, the great gods, his beloved, granted to me a reign without equal ... the goddess Gula, his helper, ... , the lordship of dominion, ... , the lordship of shepherding, ... , the lordship of herding, ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šarru-ila'i. Good health to the king, my lord!
... the king's men
Balasî, ...
and the life of Ku...
Witness NN.
... the king, my lord
Witness Ibašši-ilani, son of Nergal-ila'i.
... of copper
the king, my lord, ...
Uasî, son of Ta'la'a, gardener; Našuh-dilini, 3 women: a total of 3 people.
Gugū, king of the land Lulim, a barbarian whose home is remote, who had not heard of the might of the kings who came before me, (and) who did not respect the oath(s sworn) by the gods Aššur (and) Babu, abandoned his royal residence during a (military) campaign and fled afar. (v 10) The awesome brilliance of the god Aššur, king of the gods, my lord, overwhelmed him and he sent to me as a gift his royal daughter, his own offspring, (v
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, I will settle it in my presence. I will bring them all in and give them back what they have taken.
I sent my eunuchs (and) governors against them (and) they conquered the land Ḫalēnu. They burned the city Uqāya, his fortified city, with fire. They cut down the poplars of that city and set (them) up as a mound.
... Third extispicy...
an estate of 8 decares of field adjoining the side road of Sairi, adjoining the field of Bel-ibni,
Concerning Šarru-emuranni about whom the king, my lord, gave me orders, I said: "Your horses and men must not pass before the king!" —
20 hectares of arable land, 10 hectares under cultivation therein.
x mules from Kilizi:
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord!
The scholar ... together with the inhabitants of the city Mugisu ...
... his ...
x bags of lentils, 30 (bags of) sesame,
Ea-mušēzib, my gate, bearer of my scepter, the one who opens the gate of the farthest (quarter), the one who guards the gate of the rising sun,
... to your aid which ...
I have written to the king, my lord, that I have collected 260 horses, 13 small (soldiers), 277 horses, 15 men, in all 527 horses and 28 men, and sent them to them. Let the king, my lord, ask the scribe.
I shall tell it to Belšunu, saying: "Send me some men to keep watch for me."
which in the palace of the king ...
Adad-nerari (III), king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, son of Arik-dīn-ili, king of Assyria, son of Enlil-nārārī (who was) also king of Assyria:
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
From Rašil the older, servant of the king.
All this (is) from the commentary.
Total 160 tables, consumption.
until ...
... the king's ...
a snake ...
x shekels of silver upon him ...
... to the king, my lord
From Balasî.
... to the king
... to the feet
1 writing-board ...
horse trainers.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the priest should go to the cella of Marduk ...
... did not go ... He returned and put on the ornaments (again), and dressed himself for the ordeal.
I wrote ...
... which I had previously built ... I built (and) completed (it) from its foundations to its crenellations...
... them ... to the house ...
The lower part ...
The vineyard of the regular offerings of Aššur and Mullissu —
And since the chief tailor has been killed, there is no one who can tell (about it) to the king.
... and the head
The one who reveres Aššur and my gods will be saved; he will escape and be rescued in Bit-Bunakki.
(As for) me, Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of the gods, I mustered my numerous troops (and) took the direct road against the land of the Chaldeans. I conquered the lands Mannea, Que, Ḫilakku, (and) Pillatu and the land Tyre, which had not submitted to my yoke, and I imposed upon them corvée (and) tribute.
Witness Aššur-reṣuwa, eunuch, scribe of the queen.
... their harvest
Let the king, my lord, write me quickly so that I can set out.
... you say ...
of the weapon ...
Witness Šamaš. Witness Nergal.
To the god Aššur, father of the gods, great lord, his lord:
and Nabû-ušallim ...
I, Nabonidus, king of Babylon, the one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, the one who reveres the great gods, am the one who built (this) house.
The 'third man' of the chariot ...
4 talents of iron, capital, belonging to the smiths of the Inner City, are not being paid for, and are being sold for one mina of silver inside Harran.
... house ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
The king, my lord, has treated the son of Dakuru justly. The king, my lord, has said: "Dakuru ...
We shall stay here until the clouds disperse; the king, my lord, should send a messenger to the Inner City and Arbela.
saying: "The former one was Nabû, the latter one was ...
NN, shepherd; in all x persons — the town of Til-U... , in the district of the city of Sarugi.
Witness Zarutî, cohort commander.
Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan) ...
... -ibni, farmer, his servant —
Witness Abdi-Ramman, ...
You will put your trust in your palace, and you will be confident. You will put your trust in your son, and he will be king. You will put your trust in the god Ninurta, and he will make your son triumph.
The king, my lord, should know (this). In his fifth regnal year he said: "I will not give (any) of my booty to the enemy."
Month Tishri (VII), ... th day, eponym year of Nabû-kenu-uṣur.
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
(As for) the one who alters my handiwork, may the gods Aššur, Adad, (and) the great gods glare at him angrily and make his name (and) his seed disappear from the land!
Witness Asî.
The engraver will do as he says, and ... against anyone who ...
Witness Paqaha, village manager.
Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Concerning the fortress about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "I have received ... ; Zalaya, the ... ean, ... ; the Sapiean ... ; they have passed before us" — when they told this to me, I ...
... I shall come. The mayors
all his ... the throne ...
... they did not do their work
10 ... ;
... the word ...
... months
Ditto by Ištar of Nineveh and Ištar of Arbela!
In the future, may a future ruler, one of the kings, my descendants, whom Aššur and Ištar name to rule the land and the people, renovate its dilapidated section(s) when that wall becomes old and dilapidated. May he find an inscribed object bearing my name, anoint (it) with oil, make an offering, (and) return (it) to its place.
Witness Aplu-uṣur, enemy of Bel-ša-iqbi.
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Now the messengers of the sons of Mukin-zeri have gone to Puqudu.
If the sun rises and its light is yellow: ...
Witness Nuhšaya, porter.
You place two turtledoves before Šamaš, and recite: “They are placed as a pledge.”
... your well-being ...
Month ... , xth day, eponym year of Šulmu-... , governor of ...
2 ... ;
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
As to what you wrote to me: "When the servants of the king, my lord, brought me (the letter), I said to him: 'Send your servants to me! Let me send them to the king, my lord, and let the king, my lord, send me the Arameans whom I sent to you'" — he wrote to me: "I have sent the Arameans to you, and I am sending the rest of the men to you. I have sent the Arameans to you because of the order of the king, my lord."
(As for) Nabû-naʾid (and) Bēl-ēṭir, sons of Nabû-šuma-ēreš, the šandabakku (governor of Nippur) whose father, the one who had engendered them, had stirred up Urtaku to take away the land Akkad — after Nabû-šuma-ēreš, who had fled from the land Gambulu to Assyria (and) had set foot on Assyrian soil, had (v 10) opened the city gate of Nine
Bel-iqišanni,
Witness NN. Witness Barruqu.
I have written to Urmah ...
Witness Quleî.
all to ...
Concerning the farmer, the shepherd and the ...
In Tishri (VII) the watch of the moon will be (kept) for me.
All this, of Aššur-ayyali.
who ... ed you
The people are assembled, and their houses
The king ... upon the rikshaw ...
A tablet of the palace supervisor to Indabiya and Uraš-... , my sons.
I have written to you; do not be negligent ...
Nabû-eriba, son of Nabû-dammiq, ...
Silver is his fingernail.
Total 23 horses,
Month Ab (V), 18th day, eponym year of NN.
After the king, my lord, has sat on the throne, Bel-ahhe-eriba ... will come from ...
... the bakers, as ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-šumu-ka''in. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and DN bless the king, my lord!
The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number. Check-up...
If Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, goes to the sanctuary of his sons in the ziggurrat, and Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, seizes the throne of Assyria, and Šamaš-šumu-ukin, his brother, seizes the throne of Babylon, will the kingship of Babylon be delivered to him? Will he exercise the kingship of the land of Sumer and Akkad in his presence? Will he bring the land of Gala to him? Will he live and be well?
They shall pay at the threshing floor of the city of Argasu. If they do not, they shall increase by 5 seahs per homer.
1 silver tribute bowl;
At the command of the god Aššur, I built the city Ḫarrān for the life of the king of the gods, the god Aššur, to be a joyful dwelling, a pleasure palace for my lordly leisure, a restful dwelling, a broad temple, a great shrine, a lofty sanctuary, a temple of delight, a palace of joy, a residence of jubilation, a house of celebration, a palace of praise, a temple of rejoicing, a dwelling of jubilation, a palace of joy, a residence of j
NN, ditto ... ;
... today
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why is it that for the life of the king, my lord, it is good to give bread, but for the life of the woman it is not good?"
straw ...
The king stands up and seizes the singer. He sings, “... ,” and completes his song.
Nabû-mušeṣi, deputy of the chief scribe;
I have seen the moon, and the sun has become faint.
... I said to my lord
... the gate of the Firmament ...
... have been done ...
... I have sent ...
... who
Concerning the gold for the fingernail (and) the pomegranate about which the king, my lord, wrote to me,
I said to him: "Bring me from among your servants, let me stand in my presence, and I will bring you out."
The dais of destiny of the god Aššur, in which he had taken up residence, became old and dilapidated. The kings, my ancestors, had repaired its dilapidated section(s), but they had not made (them) as bright as daylight. I had its dilapidated section(s) rebuilt and I made (them) shine like daylight. I had a royal statue of myself made and I had the praise of my heroism and the praise of the heroism of my son, Ashurbanipal, my favorite son, inscribed
Witness Nabû-balassu-iqbi, baker.
The money is paid completely. That field, house, threshing floor, garden, and well are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Witness NN, ... of the central city.
... the eclipse which took place in the morning
If the Old Man star comes close to the top of the moon and stands there: the king will become angry with his land, and there will be hostility in his land.
... garden ...
their ... s ...
... Aššur-šarru-uṣur
To the king, my lord: your servant Mannu-ki-Adad. Good health to the king, my lord!
... them
Concerning what Bel-iddina said in the presence of the king, my lord: "... s to the deputy ...
Witness NN, 'third man' of the chariotry.
On the 30th day the moon disappeared; the king will say: "This is not a sign, it is not portent." On the 27th day the moon disappeared; on the 29th day the moon disappeared in the sky, and on the 30th day it disappeared. For four days it disappeared in the sky, and for four days it did not.
Ditto, ditto; may they make you like a fly, may they cover you with honey and oil, and may they turn you into a caged bird.
to the king, my lord, ...
... persons ...
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Sagab (651).
... fish ...
Seal of Bur-... ,
Nabû-balassu-iqbi
... this ...
How, when the boat is in the middle of the river, the reed thicket is cut, and the water is low, is it possible to cross over?
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... the Gambulians
The architect ...
2 ditto — Il-ba... , ditto — Ba... ,
... the goddesses Bēlet-ilī, ... , Ḫaya, ...
Remanni-Issar has gone to the town Kar-Aššur in accordance with the road that leads to it.
O lord, exalted lord, king of Sippar, the one who loves justice, the one who makes the great shrines shine, the one who protects the weak, the one who loves truth, the one who makes the great shrines shine, the one who protects the weak, the one who loves truth, the one who makes the great shrines shine, the one who protects the weak, the one who loves truth, the one who makes the great shrines shine, the one who protects the weak, the one who loves truth, the one who makes the great shrines shine, the one
... entered ... , and they have been staying in the mule stables.
Disregard that ... for the heart of the troops ...
... is good. The road ...
Your servant, the šandabakku: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! May Enlil, Ninurta and Nusku bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
If the moon becomes visible in Sivan (III) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
Witness Nabû-na'id, ditto. Ditto Nabû-naṣir, palace farmer.
The chief eunuch opens his ear and says: "The gods have heard ... "
Sanini, who ... , has paid the son of Sasî 1 1/2 minas of gold for ... , and has taken 50 ... from him. He has given it to NN.
They have made a golden statue of Nikkal, the former one, and have made it stand on a lion. They have made a golden statue of the ... s of the upper sea, ... , and have placed it in it. They have made a golden statue of the ... s of the lower sea, ... , and have placed it in it. They have made a golden statue of the ... s of the great sea, ... , and have placed it in it.
If the moon and sun are in opposition: the king of the land will widen his understanding.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
... and in the name of the king who does not revere Marduk, king of Babylon ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
I conquered the lands Sallia (and) Lulume in their entirety, and the land Alzu.
All is well with ...
... the fort
Ri(b)a ... , king of ...
Witness Šumma-ilani.
1 prayer bowl ditto;
Moreover, (as for) Ṣidqâ, the king of the city Ashkelon who had not bowed down to my yoke, I forcibly removed the gods of his father’s house, together with his possessions, and took (them) to Assyria.
... the captives of the Lišamu ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
Now then I am sending Nabû-eṭir, my messenger, to the Palace to speak with my father. If he does not return alive, I shall write to the Palace.
(As for) the one who alters the wording of this inscription and writes his (own) name, may the goddess Ištar, the great queen, look at you angrily and destroy your kingship.
5 talents, the New Palace of Calah;
I appointed over them Bēl-ibni, a son of a rab banî (and) a scion of Šuanna (Babylon), who had grown up like a young puppy in my palace, as king of the land of Sumer and Akkad.
1 head-cloth of Nabû-ahhe-eriba, the delegate of Tyre;
Month Iyyar (II), 10th day, eponym year of Zazaya, governor of Arpad.
(As for) the Cimmerians, a dangerous enemy who had never feared my ancestors, and who did not respect the oath(s sworn) by (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar, my lords, he (Ummanaldašu) sat on the throne of the land Qedar and constantly plundered the land Amurru. He did not respect my treaty (and) he disregarded my favorable decisions.
On my third campaign, I marched against Ahseri, the king of the land Mannea. With the support of the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela, the gods Ninurta, Nergal, (and) Nusku, I entered the land Mannea and (iii 10) I conquered (and) plundered twenty of his fortified cities, together with small(er) settlements in their
... will be placed.
Month of the god Sîn, first day, eponymy of Ša-Adad-nīnu.
Witness Bel-abu'a.
La-... , ... of Šep-... , for 40 ...
7 big loaves;
which are in the river of Bit-Ugirtu, 370 of them have been dug out.
shall place 10 minas of refined silver (and) one mina of pure gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
At that time, the temple of Aššur, my lord, which kings who preceded me had previously built, had become dilapidated and old. I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I laid its foundation on limestone and made (it) as firm as a mountain. I built the temple of Aššur, my lord, anew according to its original appearance. I made two nāḫiru-statues which stand at the side of the gate of the god Nunnamnir and the other side of the gate of the god Nunnamn
... the Babylonians ...
The singer washes his hands, performs a sheep offering, and gives incense. The singer intones, “The king is my lord.” He burns a female kid.
Iqisu,
Go ... !"
Witness NN, royal bodyguard.
I am Mullissu ...
... the gods of the king. If ... , the king ...
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur, eunuch.
Concerning what the king, my lord, said ... , on the 10th, the 11th, the 15th and the xth day ... to ...
May your gardens and your work ...
Adad-apla-iddina, son of the goddess Ninkal-kina, king of Babylon, the one who renovated the temple of the god Šamaš, the one who built the temple of the god Ea, the one who (re)confirmed the sattukku-offering(s) of the gods, son of Iddin-ahi, king of Babylon, the one who renovated the temple of the god Ea, the one who (re)confirmed the sattukku-offering(s) of the gods, son of Er
The king, my lord, should not say: "He has not done his work."
On the 16th day Abi-rahî came and brought the tribute. On the 17th day he left from Malak and arrived in Adinni-Šamaš of ...
... they became frightened ... they captured alive the (king) of the land Judah (... ) ... they took away from me the chariots, wagons, (and) military equipment ... they became frightened by my weapons ... they came to fear my name. They became servants of mine.
Witness NN.
In the future, may a later prince, when that wall becomes dilapidated and he rebuilds (it), restore my monumental inscriptions and inscribed name to their places. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-aplu-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan).
Concerning the saplings about which the king, my lord, wrote to me, they should be brought in and planted immediately. The new saplings of the month Adar (XII) are growing in Dur-Šarruken; I shall go and have them brought in.
Bir-Ramman ...
The merchant from Carchemish killed his servants, but they did not let me go out. I have appealed to the goddess Mullissu, the goddess of Kidmuri, the mother who created me, and the king, my lord.
I had a foundation inscription written in my name and the praise of (the god) Aššur, the great lord, my lord, written on it and I placed (it) in it. Moreover, I had all of the deeds that I had done written on it and I deposited (it) for ever after in the foundation of my lordly palace.
Seal of Nabû-riba-ahhe, scribe.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
"... chief eunuch ...
x ditto, the 'base of the throne' 3 seahs of chick-peas, 3 'litres' of lentils,
2,000 ... ;
The king, my lord, will seize Šummu-ilu, son of Araš-šarru-ilani, the recruitment officer, in my presence.
a ... ;
The wild bull which is slain is the wild bull of Anu. The lion which is slain is the lion of Enlil. The wild bull which is slain is the wild bull of the steppe.
Mannu-ki-... ;
their big ox, their harvest ...
... his eyes ... Ull... he has blessed.
... his face
The best of health to my lord!
The land of the king is well, the fort is well, the king, my lord, can be glad.
... your ... , the land of Hana.
Tab-shar-Ashur,
... the son of Anu
Monument of Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of the deities Aššur, Anu, Sîn, Šamaš, Adad, (and) Bēl (Marduk), the one who built the temple of the goddess Bēlet-ilī, the one who renovated the shrines of the gods Aššur, his lord, (and) the one who fashioned image(s) of the deities Aššur, Bēl (Marduk), N
In the garden, at the entrance of the house, in the courtyard, in the well, in the fountain, in the ... , in the presence of the stars of heaven, the gods Ea, Šamaš, Asalluḫi, the Assyrian Ištar, the goddess Ninlil, the goddess Ningirsu, the goddess Ningirsu-naṣbat, the god Kusu, the goddess Ningirsu-kubat, the god Kusu-naṣbat, the god Kusu-naṣbat-š
Mannu-ki-Arbail, the ... , and the scribes ... who went with us have been ... ed.
Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, viceroy of Ur, son of Ningal-iddin, viceroy of Ur, built Ebabbar, the temple of the goddess Ningal, his lady.
I tore down that small palace in its entirety, from the foundations to the battlements. I diverted the course of the Tebilti River from the center of the city and directed its outflow.
... the king, my lord
Witness Kimamaya.
Witness Abdi-Dadi, chief of the levy.
A tablet of ... -Sin to the king, his lord: saying, "To the king, my lord:
The 'weapon'-mark of the 'increment' rises to the left.
Month Nisan (I), eponym year of Ereš-ilu.
... said to me
Now, let the king, my lord, send a letter to Il-yada' and let him come to the review. And let me come too and have a look at the old men with him. The king should decide what to do.
Witness U...
20 ditto each, at a length of 1 cubit (50 cm), width x cubits (1 m), thickness 1 cm;
Witness ... -Nabû.
Concerning the star ... about which the king, our lord, wrote to us, there is no (interpretation) at all. It is not like the star of the plough. It is like the star of the crown.
The gods Aššur (and) Adad will listen to the prayers of a later prince when that wall becomes dilapidated and he rebuilds (it). May (the same prince) restore my clay cone to its place.
... of Šumma-ilani, at the disposal of Ninuayu.
1 seah 1 'litre' of spiced loaves; a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
... for seed corn
... Enuma Anu Enlil
Palace of Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, descendant of Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, offspring of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, chosen of the gods Aššur and Marduk, in Nineveh, the site of my royal residence.
... years
... the palace herald
Disregard what they speak with their mouths, or what they think...
... to Nabû'a
After Mukin-zeri had set up camp against me, I was afraid of the king's wrath.
I struck down with the sword (and) I laid low their magnates, together with Nabû-šuma-iškun, the son of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), who had fled from the chariots of silver and had taken refuge in the thickets. I captured alive their leaders and brought (them) before me.
An estate of 1 hectare ... ;
... he has become frightened
... I do not know the ... of the king. I do not ...
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
Bel and Nabû ...
I have seen ... ; you ...
An estate of 3 decares adjoining Lubba-ana-ili;
May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May Aššur, Bel and Nabû give happiness and physical well-being to the king, my lord!
Witness Šarru-palu'a, royal bodyguard.
The fortress and the Puqudu-official of the king, our lord, are well. The servants of the king, our lord, are strong.
Shamash-kenu-usur,
He (the god Marduk) commanded me to renovate the temple of the goddess Ištar, which the gods, the fathers of the goddesses, who had been created for the city Arbela, the city of the cult center, had abandoned. The goddess Ištar, my lady, remembered her original shrine and she became happy. I ... to renovate the shrine of the goddess Šamaš, which had not been built in the past, (and) I ... I ... large horses which ... which ... the fodder ...
If the moon becomes visible in Nisan (I) on the 30th day:
... Urmanu
... concerning the killing of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, and Assurbanipal, the crown prince of the Succession Palace
Witness Suhuru.
The chief haruspex of the Akkadians, who is the governor of Calah, is in Arbela. They should bring him out and bring him to Calah. What is it that the king, my lord, commands?
I have sent ...
He enters into it, and (then) gives tribute and payment.
As to those men about whom I wrote, if they kill them or make them run away, I shall punish them.
Witness Zarutî, chariot driver of the crown prince.
... my eyes
Witness Sin-uballiṭ, ...
Fingernail of Zer-sama', owner of the land, garden, threshing floor and house being sold.
... have been brought to me.
If Scorpius comes close to the front of the moon and stands there: the reign of the king will become long; the enemy will attack, but his downfall will take place.
I had a palace of elephant ivory, ebony, boxwood, musukkannu-wood, cedar, cypress, juniper, and terebinth, (a palace that I named) Egalzagdinutukua (“The Palace Without a Rival”), constructed thereon as my royal residence and I filled (it) with splendor. I invited inside it the god Aššur, the great lord, and the gods who dwell in Assyria, then I made splendid offerings before them (and) presented (them) with my gifts
not yet ...
... river
... before the city gate of ...
Total, in the estate of 2 ... , x hectares of irrigated land in the town of Samanu.
Does your great divinity know it? Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Witness Ilumma-le'i, cohort commander.
... and he made the people ... he built a new temple for the god Bēl (Marduk) and he called it Egišnugal. He made the god Sîn, the lord of the crown, enter inside it. He made the gods Nabû, Marduk, Ninkura, and Tammuz, the gods who dwell there, rise up and take up residence inside it.
If the earth quakes all day: dispersal of the land.
The 'station' is present. The 'path' on the left ...
they go ...
... who ...
... Babylon ...
From Nabû-belu-ka''in.
The silver which the prefects of the village managers, who have been collecting it on the people of the country, is 2 talents and 18 minas of silver by the (mina) of Carchemish. My messenger has taken 1/2 shekel of gold, 3 tunics and 3 linen garments from the king's messenger.
(As for) Ḫanūnu of the city Gaza, he became frightened by my mighty weapons and fled to Egypt. I conquered the city Gaza, his royal city. I carried off ... , gold, 800 talents of silver, people, together with their property, his wife, his sons, his daughters, ... , his property, his gods, ...
x+20 hectares of field in the village of Abi-... ,
From Zakir.
Shalmaneser, strong king, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II), strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Šamšī-Adad (V), king of the four quarters (of the world):
Witness NN.
or the king or the prince, or any human being at all, who does not revere the gods Aššur, Adad, Ber, (and) the Assyrian Ištar, or the Assyrian Ištar, or the Assyrian Enlil, or the Assyrian Adad, or the Assyrian Enlil, or the Assyrian Ištar, or the Assyrian Ištar, or the Assyrian Enlil, or the Assyrian Adad, or the Assyrian Enlil, or the Assyrian Adad
... Aššur-ila'i
Witness Putaya.
I shall throw the logs into the river and fetch them.
If the moon becomes visible on the 30th day: there will be frost, variant: rumor of the enemy.
Witness Nuranu. Danaya. Urdu...
Afterwards, NN, who ... Nabû-eṭir and NN for the following year ...
x+16 ditto, of the port;
Month Adar (XII), 10th day, eponym year of Mar-larim.
On the 18th day the king goes down to the House of God. The king ... The chanter holds the whip in his left hand before the king. He places the water from the well of the star in the king's hand.
adjoining ...
... Babylon, which ...
or Mugallu ... ,
Witness Eriba-Adad.
Ditto by all the gods of Arbela!
By the command of the god Adad, my personal god, I marched to Mount Lebanon. I cut down cedar beams for the temple of the gods Anu and Adad, the great gods, my lords. I cut down cedar beams for the temple of the god Aššur, the father of the gods, the great lord. I received tribute from the land Elam, the entire mountain region, ...
6 oxen ...
... the gods on it ...
... him
adjoining the field of Nabû-duru-uṣur,
Care of Kiṣir-Aššur, exorcist of the House of Aššur.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. Good health to the king, my lord!
If in Shebat (XI) there is an earthquake: attack of the enemy, variant: of locusts.
One mina without a leader."
To the king, my lord: your servant Babu-šumu-iddina, of Calah. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
from Til-...
If a planet rises in Elul (VI): rising of business, thriving of grain.
At that time, the temple of the god Enlil, lord of the lands, my lord, which a previous king had built — its walls had buckled, its bondings had become weak, and its superstructure was in danger of collapse. I removed its dilapidated parts. I built (and) completed (it) from its foundations to its battlements with the craft of the god Kulla. I raised its superstructure like a mountain.
1, Gurini;
I, the great lord, the god Marduk, the one who loves my priesthood, the one who made my name great among the people, the one who called my name for shepherding the people, the one who made my fame great among the gods of heaven and netherworld,
... Akkadian ... , ... Akkadian ... , ... tablets, I did not write ...
... to the name
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the troops, horses, and army of the magnates of Bit-Kari of the land Sattuda, which they are assembling to go up to the mountain,
of Su...
his deputy.
If the earth quakes at night: worry for the land; the land will disappear.
Yatiʾ, the king who reveres the gods, the one who is assiduous towards their shrines, the one who is attentive to their rites, the one who is assiduous towards their sanctuaries, the one who is pious towards their sanctuaries, the one who is assiduous towards their shrines, the one who is pious towards their sanctuaries, the one who is assiduous towards their shrines, the one who is pious towards their sanctuaries, the one who is assiduous towards their shrines, the one who is pious towards
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... news of the land of Dada
(As for) the auxiliary forces and his troops, who had come to the aid of the city Ursâ (Rusâ), (iii 10) his royal city, and had taken up residence in the district of the city Kullania, together with 30 talents of gold, 800 talents of silver, choice antimony, large blocks of alabaster, beds with inlaid ivory, ivory couches, elephant ivory, ebony, boxwood, every kind of precious thing, (iii 15) his daughters, his palace women, male sing
... the magnates
They have approached Nabû-zeru-ka''in, the mayor, the deputy of Nineveh.
Your servant Ana-Nabû-taklak: I would gladly die for the king of the universe, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: The land, the army, and the servants of the king, my lord, are well. The watch of the king is very strict day and night.
Witness Ahunu.
I marched to the city Madaktu, his royal city. In a favorable month, (on) a propitious day, I approached (and) conquered that city. I brought out of it the gods of the gods (and) the goddesses, the property of the city, (and) I counted (them) as booty. I brought (them) to Nineveh and I set (them) up in their (text: “its”) temples.
Witness Nabû-ahu-uṣur, scribe.
Concerning the news of the king, my lord, it is very good. The king, my lord, has ordered (the following):
He performs this ritual twice in its entirety in the land.
If the gall bladder is overturned and lies in the cystic duct: the land will dwell in quiet.
Total 4 men for the runaways.
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-alik-pani. Good health to the king, my lord!
He has returned to Barhalza. In the hands of the messenger ...
If Adad thunders on the day of disappearance of the moon: ...
Month Tishri (VII), 22nd day, eponym year of Taklak-ana-šarri, governor of Nemed-Ištar.
There are people in the country who have taken away my fields and orchards, and there are people who have removed my servants from the service of the chief cupbearer. May the gods not abandon me! May they protect the king, my lord, and may they appoint a guard with me so that I can do justice.
Total 5 persons, exempted silver.
You shall not make common cause with Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, nor with his brothers, sons by the same mother as him, nor with his uncles, nor with his relatives, nor with his friends, nor with any other person who may revolt against Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, nor with any other person who may side with him,
thus (speaks) your ... , your women, your brothers, your sons and your daughters: "Let me be a spring lamb, let me ... "
Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
I myself took the road and marched about in my chariot. I reached the place where he was staying and he saw me. He was frightened and said: "He will die! I will not give up the mountain stones and the tribute to come to you!"
11 1/2 shekels of silver for ... ;
May the mighty weapons of Aššur, the father of the gods, who walks in front of the kings, vanquish him!
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
... Halle
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial audience gift from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
Now then the ... official
... of ...
The leftovers of silver ...
11 shekels of silver of ...
The crown prince enters (the palace) and kisses the feet of the king.
Total, x+1 house.
1,
If the moon makes an eclipse in Tishri (VII): attack of a ruler, variant: of locusts.
1 cow of silver;
I will cross the Euphrates and enter his land ...
x, (ditto) of the Sealand, sons of Yakin;
... I laid the foundation of its great wall, Badnigalbilukurašušu, (which means) “Wall Whose Brilliance Overwhelms Enemies,” upon limestone and made (it) 40 bricks thick. I raised its superstructure 99 courses of brick high. I built (and) completed (it) from its foundation(s) to its crenellations. I decorated (it) in a splendid fashion and made (it) resplendent.
I took away with my troops (and) the people under my command, without number. I made them sit on the throne of his land. I placed a eunuch of mine on the throne of his land and imposed upon him payment (in recognition) of my overlordship. I made him (now) pull my yoke. I imposed upon him annual payment of red wool, (together with) the tribute of his land.
You shall not turn against Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, nor make common cause with his enemies, nor make common cause with those who plot evil against him, nor make common cause with those who plot evil against the gods and goddesses, nor make common cause with those who plot evil against the temples and the cult centers.
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
2 minas of Nabû'a, goldsmith.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
his son of 3 spans,
Instead of their seals they impressed their fingernails.
(and whether) they will litigate and go to court.
Anu, the great gods, Šalimtu, Šalimtu-Nergal, Kubu, Kubu-amurru, Ebeh, Adad, Šala, Taramuwa, Šerua, Niru, Niru-amurru, Ningirsu, Gula, Hurmiš, Ziggurrat:
(As for) Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, prince who reveres him, the one who is the creation of the hands of the great gods, by the command of the god Aššur, father of the great gods, the god Marduk, the one who loves my priestly service,
In Ab (V) ...
Dannaya, reporter.
Chief of accounts.
... Qibi-Bel ...
This is the ... of the judgment.
... Month Adar (XII), 22nd day, eponym year of ...
The 27th of Tammuz (IV) ... the 28th ...
... he returned
Silim-Ashur has contracted and bought it for 30 shekels of silver.
... the king ...
In the hands of my messenger ... to the king, my lord.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
The food offerings for the festival and the kirrutu-rites are complete.
... x hundred sheep
The number of the roof-beams about which the king wrote to me is 226. The number of the heavy-duty roof-beams for the king's palace is 212. The number of the ... roof-beams is 9.
... , ... lî,
Will he survive and escape, be rescued and live on, be saved and spared? Will Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, be troubled and angry?
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... Arrapha ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
NN has contracted and bought from Mušallim-...
On the 16th day they were in Calah. They have finished the ... s and are working on the rest of the work.
To the king, my lord: your servant Issar-nadin-apli, the foreman of the scribes of Arbela. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû, Marduk, and Ištar of Arbela bless the king, my lord!
9 towns ...
Witness Nabû-...
Aššur-da''in-šarru, NN,
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
statue of the woman Naqīʾa ...
If it is acceptable to the king, my lord, the king should not be worried.
8 beams ... which in ... to ...
x ... , 10+x ... -garments, 10+x ... -garments,
This is from before Aššur.
On the first day of the month of Tammuz (IV), at the time of the morning offering, the well-being of the well-being of the wells was established. It was not destroyed, and I did not change the well-being of the wells.
The treaty which they made is like the king's word. Nabû-šumu-iškun and Ṣillaya are acting like rebels. They are saying: "The king's word is a lie. Why did you make an alliance with Urdu-Mullissi?"
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: good for Akkad, bad for Elam and the Westland.
Month Iyyar (II), ... th day, eponym year of NN, governor of ...
... his ...
... he is safe. If he dies or flees,
... who are present
Of ... the priests of the house of the cooks.
in my mouth ...
Witness Sukki-...
x farmers, x shepherds, x herdsmen, 696 people.
If there is an eclipse in Sivan (III) on the 14th day and it rises in the east and sets in the west: three gods will be seen together; if there is an eclipse in the middle of the night and two gods are seen together: the king of Ur and the king of Ur will have a good reign; the king of Ur will eat the food of the king of Ur; the king of Ur will be well; the son of the king will be his heir; the son of the king will not be his heir; the throne of the king will be stable; the
... they will glaze the bricks.
they should listen to his ...
... their threshing floors
At that time, the shrines of the gods of Akkad, my father, became dilapidated and I rebuilt the temple of the goddess Ištar, mistress of the lands, his lady. I rebuilt the temple of Eanna, the pure abode, which had become dilapidated. I made its structure larger than before and (then) I laid its foundation(s) on top of (its) original foundation(s).
Witness Mannu-ki-ilu. Witness Husurayu.
Aplaya-tel-hate ...
Marduk-apla-iddina (II), son of Yakin
I decorated Emašmaš (and) Egašankalama with silver (and) gold, (and) filled (them) with splendor.
Afterwards, Teumman, the (very) image of a gallû-demon, sat on the throne of Urtaku in order to (re)assert his (own) authority. He (Teumman) disregarded the oath(s sworn) by the gods Nabû and Marduk, the gods who support me, (and) he constantly sought out evil (deeds). He plundered the land Elam (and) he took hostages from the land Elam. He fled alone to me (and) grasped the feet of my royal majesty.
Witness Nargî.
Bel-dan,
4 sheep ... ;
x ... s, 1 seah of sesame oil,
He pours out a libation bowl, ... , and pours wine and beer. He offers ... , and says: “He who has no name, no seed, no offspring, ... ”
(Property) of Qullabu, the prince who resides in Sippar, the lord of Babylon, ...
In the city Ṭurušpâ, his (Urtaku’s) city, I captured him (Urtaku) alive and bound him with a bear. I erected my royal statue in the citadel of Ṭurušpâ.
Witness NN, ša šēpi guard.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
Ashurnasirpal, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of the deities, (and) the one who made the two shekels of silver shine:
Disregard that you, the haruspex my lord, have seen fear and terror at night...
Witness Aššur-aplu-iddina. Witness Ubru-na'id, oil-presser.
... ;
I had a bridge constructed opposite the Citadel Gate with paving stones of white limestone and I named it “The Palace of the Entrance of the Mountain.” I had a canebrake planted alongside it and I called it “The Entrance of the Mountain.” I had a bridge constructed opposite the Citadel Gate with paving stones of silver and bronze and I named it “The Entrance of the Mountain.” I had a bridge constructed opposite the Citadel Gate with paving stones of lapis lazuli and I named it “The Entrance of the Mountain.”
The 26th day: joy of heart.
30 ditto, at the disposal of ... ,
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhe, conscript.
... s, seed corn in the cultivated field
With the strength of my heart, I advanced against the city Cutha. I set up my camp (and) assembled my battle array. I brought out the horses, archers, (and) Elamite, Chaldean, (and) Cimmerian troops, together with Nergal-nāṣir, together with the citizens of the city Sennacherib, and I counted (them) as booty.
Witness NN.
5 minas of silver by the (mina) of Carchemish belonging to Nergal-šarru-uṣur, at the disposal of Nabû-šumu-iddina, son of Nabû-ra'im-ketti, scribe of the governor of Dur-Šarruken.
“... Ištar ... ”
Mannu-zeri-le'i,
6 bags of (mixed) kernels.
Bel-dan,
A cloudbank lies to the south.
Nabû-ušabši ...
Total: 3 seahs of bread, 1 seah 8 'litres' of beer.
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Whoever lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Dari-abu'a or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Tabni-Issar, his sons and his grandsons, shall pay 2 minas of silver.
Speak with Ardâ, and tell him: "The 20th day is the day of the review. Why did you and Aplaya, the eunuch, ... ? Why did you and Nabû-eṭir-napšati ... ? Why did you and Sasî speak about ... ? Why did you and the ... speak with Sasî? Why did you not tell me what you saw? ...
Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria: With mighty weapons which I have never stopped making, with the strong weapons which the cypresses which I cut down had grown strong and with the strength which I constantly gain, I have never stopped marching about. I have never stopped marching about in my camp, nor have I stopped marching about with my troops.
Total: food master ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Kiṣir-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord!
Ninurta-ilaya,
... Calah
... city god
... upon them
Egišlamšaršar: “House where the rites of the god are performed.”
To the god Adad, canal inspector of heaven and earth, lord of the awe-inspiring gods, whose wrath is unrelenting, whose fierce attack is unrivalled, who dwells in the shrine of the god Kittu, the exalted one, the one who makes opposing forces agree, the one who makes the four quarters agree, the one who is clothed with brilliance, the one who is clothed with awe-inspiring radiance, the one who is clothed with splendor, the one who is clothed with a
Concerning what the king wrote to me: "Why did you gaze at the sky? I have not seen (anything)." — I did not gaze at the sky, I was looking at the earth.
... creator of ...
And this is the truth: They have cut down the tree where he was standing, and he has died. But they have not told me about it. They have concealed it from me, and I have not heard it. Let him come here, and let him come to the palace of the king.
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Palace of Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, son of Sennacherib, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, descendant of the king who preceded him, (who was) also king of Assyria: With the strength of the gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Nabû, Marduk, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) I
1 woman, ... ;
... have come down
I have brought 90 men from the town Isitu into the town Ezirtu, and have settled 30 men there. The remaining x men I have settled in ...
with ...
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 21st day, eponym year of Dadî, treasurer.
Now then the messengers who had brought the letter are telling Nikkal-iddin: "Fear not, Esarhaddon has put you on the throne, and he will make everything all right."
... the goddess Tašmētu, the god ... , the great queen ... , the one who makes him (the god Marduk) rise and who makes him sit ... , the one who makes the foundation of the throne of the king of the four quarters firm, ... , the one who makes the omens favorable and the oracular command of the gods ... , the one who makes the ... of Assyria prosper, ... his weapons ... who from the rising sun to the setting sun, who goes before him and ...
The king performs the sheep offerings. One ox, six sheep for Aššur; one sheep, one stone (for) Šerua; two stones (for) the Enlil and Dagan; three stones (for) the Judges of the Dais of Destinies; two stones (for) the Enlil and Dagan of the House of Aššur; two stones (for) ... ; four stones (for) ... ; one stone (for) ... ; one stone (for) ... ;
The city and the temples of the king, my lord, are well. I am keeping the watch of the king, my lord.
at the disposal of Ubru-Nabû, ...
Bar-dî has contracted and bought it from Bel-šarru-uṣur for 5 1/2 minas of silver by the mina of the king.
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
Witness Bel-ṣalli.
Suri-abu, shepherd; 1 son; 1 woman; 168 sheep in the village of Suriba-Alla.
The king, my lord, will achieve his goal.
2 ... the chief ...
... the xth day;
The ... servant of Nabû-šallim-ahhe said to me as follows: "When the king returns from Nineveh to Calah, the eunuchs will return to the barley. The cupbearer from Calah will return to the barley. He will be dressed in purple and wear a purple cap. He will stay two days in the Succession Palace. The goldsmith will bring the golden statue."
As to what my lord wrote to me: "... ; if ... , ... the bricks ... ; there is a big ... in it; if I hear that the king is coming to Der, I shall bring the city-wall materials there and lay them down there" — I shall lay down all the bricks that I have there.
If Adad shouts on a day without clouds: there will be darkness in the land.
With Bel and Nabû, who give the kingship of the universe to the king of the lands, my lord, your servants who have served you, who have done your work and who have not been remiss in the king's service for three years, (and) who have delivered the king's work in three months —
Palace of Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria.
May DNN bless the ... of the king, my lord.
(Property) of the palace of ... of Nineveh.
... I made (them) an object of wonder. After I had made the canal (and) the ditch dug with bitumen and baked bricks, I ... ed ... over the meadowland.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
as ...
I took the city Elenzaš as a royal city and a fortress for that district, and (then) I changed its former name and
The brewers take 9 seahs of barley for beer, including that for the huzirina-rites before the Image.
future prince who ...
I will bring the logs, beams, and roof-beams here and use them to build the temple. I will also bring the doors and the beams here.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
... scholar
Iyyar (II), Sivan (III), Tammuz (IV), Elul (VI), Tishri (VII), these five days the moon will not be seen with the sun.
Witness Mutakkil-Marduk, scribe.
... he will make his eyes clear
Now the gods of the king, my lord, have made the Karallaeans do this to me.
to ...
The ... s who are in ...
x minas of silver belonging to Lu-ki-iddina, at the disposal of Dannî.
Witness Šulmu-beli. Witness Su'a, from Calah.
and he will be in his heart.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether, (should) Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, appoint the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the position which is written in this papyrus,
100 (tablets of) undecided matters, (a collection) without a (single) copy, (a collection of) ancient lore, (a collection of) ancient wisdom, (a collection of) ancient tradition,
... the fort
Whoever erases my inscribed name and writes his (own) name, or ... , or ...
We went to the Palace of ... and ... ed the ... of the rear ... in ...
... Hurdanu to the palace ...
If the sun stands in the halo of the moon: there will be truth in the land; the son will speak the truth with his father; universal peace.
... Tattî, and his people
By the gods of the king, I have not written anything in this papyrus.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty, or (that) the oracle query has become jumbled in my mouth...
Witness Itti-Adad-ahhutu, servant of the vizier.
... I wrote to him
shall give 10 minas of silver (and) one mina of gold, and shall return the money tenfold to its owner. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
He shall die in his time, and his country will be devastated.
... Witness Inurta-šarru-uṣur.
... for the watch
If the moon reaches the sun and follows it closely: there will be a flood.
Witness Nabû-šezib.
... fish ...
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
x+7 ... , 19 ... , 1 bed;
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, ditto of the crown prince.
... to the river
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The barber ...
... we have opened it up and ... ed it.
... have been attacked, and ... have been killed.
x reinforced lower garments, ditto, ditto, ... ;
The city of the royal well. The city of Kar-Harran.
... Nabû in Babylon, and ... in the canebreak.
Should Assurbanipal, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, appoint the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the priesthood of the temple of Marduk?
The lackeys bring the iron utensils and the iron tongs and place them in your hand. He swings the purification device over you, comes and swings it over you again. He swings the purification device over the door and comes and swings it over you again. He swings the purification device over the door-jamb and comes and swings it over you again. He swings the purification device over the door-jamb and comes and swings it over you again. He swings the purification device over the door and comes and swings it over you again.
Zeru-ukin, Nergal-šarru-uṣur, Hannî,
The people of all lands bless you, O king, my lord. You are the one who ... the temple of the kings. All the people who are in your presence and who guard your good deeds, bless your gods. Tomorrow, when you are old and grey, and your good deeds have become numerous, Aššur will ... your gates.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šarru-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
... they did not agree
... on account of it he went to the city ... Liphur-Bel ... Muqinni-Aššur and NN ...
Let me write and inform the king, my lord, that he is doing very well.
they do not give ...
will bring horses ... and come.
he has gone ...
These five months I have been waiting for the news of the king, my lord, and now Bel and Nabû have encouraged me. They have taken me to Calah.
... in the lower earth, without ... , the great kings ...
... 4 ...
a ditto of quinces;
... I exempted them from labour and corvée service and ...
... to one
3 sons of Nabû-zeru-lešir;
Mars became visible in the path of the Enlil stars. It is faint, its radiance is like that of a torch. I have seen it. I am herewith sending a detailed report to the king, my lord.
... he will reach ...
9 (cuts of) meat, the New Palace;
So that the construction of my palace might be carried out correctly and that my handiwork be completed, at that time, the god Aššur and the goddess Ištar, who love my priesthood (and) who selected me (lit. “who called my name”), revealed to me a source of trunks of cedar, which since distant days grew thick as they stood in seclusion in the Sirāra mountain range.
The 'station' is present. The 'paths' are 2, the lower one is white and speckled. The 'well-being' is present...
Iranzu of the land Mannea heard about the might of (the god) Aššur, my lord, that I had done battle with in the mountains, and fear of (the god) Aššur, my lord, overwhelmed him. He came to Dur-Tukulti-apil-Ekur, which is on the border of ... , before me, and kissed my feet. I received from him ... horses, mules, oxen, and sheep and goats, ...
1/2 mina of silver by the (mina) of the king belonging to Šamaš-dalâ, at the disposal of Mannu-ki-Ninua.
... the elders ...
... my ...
I have now written to you from my house. Where is my share? You have taken my feet from the ground! I have no more to do!
... who ...
Bar-sipitu has written to me through the legate: "Why did you kill ... ?"
May Zeru-ibni, the creator of the stele, destroy your name and your seed from the land.
... the city of the treasurer
40 ditto, of the country;
Lu-ahu'a, the Bit-Hambanite, and Ahiqar, the Bit-Sinnean, have come to me on account of Bel-emuranni. They have spoken to me as follows: "Come, and let all the men who are with you come and give us whatever we gave to Bit-Hamban." All the Elamites who came with you have been killed.
... ;
4 homers of wheat belonging to Bahianu, at the disposal of La-amašši-Bel.
adjoining the house of Luqu, ...
I set up my stele (and) inscribed my name therein. I placed a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over it.
x shekels, ditto, ditto, ditto, the Assyrian(s);
Indabibi, who sat on the throne of the land Elam after Tammarītu, saw the might of my weapons that had previously prevailed over the land Elam and (as for) the Assyrians whom I had sent to aid Nabû-bēl-šumāti, son of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), who had fled to him (and) had taken refuge in his land, he brought them out of the prison where Nabû-bēl-šumāti had confined them
12 minas of silver, capital, belonging to Šamaš-abu'a, horse trainer,
A fog portends Jupiter and Orion.
The gods who come out with Aššur to the house of Dagan.
Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, his lord:
To the king, my lord: your servant Nashir-Bel. Good health to the king, my lord!
... Kalbi-Ukû
Nabû-higlissi
6 blankets, a bed ... ;
I made the extensive land of Sumer and Akkad bow down at the feet of the god Adad. By the command of the god Aššur, the great lord, my lord, I marched about victoriously against the enemy. With the weapons of the god Aššur, my lord, and my fierce battle array, I fought with them and defeated them. I carried off their troops as booty. I filled the plain with the corpses of their warriors. I destroyed their settlements (and) burned their cities.
... of the major-domo of the crown prince.
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of Assyria, unrivalled king, pious shepherd who revere the great gods, guardian of truth who loves justice, renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the insubmissive, (and) the one who strikes enemies with lightning:
I put to the sword the population of the city Ḫirimmu, a dangerous enemy, and I did not spare a single one. I captured alive the Yasubigallians, a dangerous enemy, and I counted (them) as booty.
1/2 mina, 3 minas ... , with 2 star-shaped ornaments ... ;
Bel-dan,
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
I built a house for the god Aššur, my lord, which is inside the palace, which is inside the city Aššur, and which is called Ebabbar-Erišum, and which is inside the district of the city Aššur. I built a house for the god Aššur, my lord, which is inside the district of the city Aššur, to the right and left, and which is called Ebabbar-Aššur-aḫḫē-rēša-iši, king of Assyria. I
I shall inspect the fortresses and see how the work is progressing.
Amat-šumu-iškun
If in Nisan (I) the sun rises and its light is red: the land will live in quiet.
(               Break               )
... the goddess Gula, who ...
Concerning what you wrote to me through your emissaries:
... the goddess Ištar
to ...
The king has heard ...
To the 'farmer,' our lord: your servants Adad-šumu-uṣur and Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health to our lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless our lord!
... ;
From Ašaredu.
Witness Balasî.
The king, my lord, told me: "Let them return and give me 40,000 homers of barley until now!"
(As for) ... , the one who had plundered and taken away as booty a substantial tribute of silver, he (Nabonidus) brought the city Uruk to ...
I have written ...
In the future, in far-off days, may a future prince, when that temple becomes old and dilapidated, restore it. May he anoint with oil my monumental inscriptions, make sacrifices, (and) return (them) to their places. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
... the Gambulians ...
Witness Adad-aplu-iddina.
... they should not pull out
... bread and honey ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
I had a wall built around it (the city) and I named it Kār-Dūr-Šarrukīn. I had forty-five towers built and I named them after the mountains. I had a stele made, had all the victorious conquests that I achieved written on it, and I erected (it) for ever after in the gateway(s) of the great towers.
... Il-yada' ...
... Let the king ask Lu-šakin.
In the middle of the sun, which he held in his hand, Adad thundered, and the sun set.
... their ...
At that time, the lands of the land Ḫatti, which had rebelled against me, ...
in all x persons, servants of these gentlemen —
saying: "... s to the king
he took ...
Sphinxes of alabaster, together with sphinxes of cast urudû-copper, which were overlaid with zaḫalû-silver and (which) had lamassu-figures of ebony, cypress, cedar, juniper, and elammaku-wood, and which were clad with silver and gold, (and) whose features were brilliant —
... upon it ...
... with my stele ...
in Arbela.
... The coils of the colon are 16 in number...
As to what you wrote to me: "The king of Urarṭu and his troops are coming, saying: 'Where are you going to take them?' —
This is a month when the whole world rejoices. The gods have gone out and taken up residence in their abodes. May the god Marduk, the god who created the world, look upon my deeds with pleasure and may he make all the lands bow down at my feet.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-bani-ahhe. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I, Bālū, king of the city Tyre, Menasu, king of the city Yadi, Qašme, king of the city Udummu, Muṣurī, king of the city Maʾum, Ṣilli-Bēl, king of the city Ḫazītu, Mitinti, king of the city Ashkelon, Milki-ašapša, king of the city Gublu, Mattān-Baʾal, king of the city Arwad, Abī-Baʾal, king
To the king, our lord: your servants Nabû-ra'im-nišešu (and) Salamanu. Good health to the king, our lord! May Nabû (and) Marduk bless the king, our lord!
