I marched through difficult paths on horseback and had my personal chariot carried on (men’s) necks. I roamed about on foot like a wild bull.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
11 shekels of silver of Ištar of Nineveh belonging to Šep-Issar, ...
5 minas 6 shekels of silver for the seal of Ṭab-bet-Issar, at the disposal of Šep-Aššur.
... salt ...
What ...
... Uruk
Now then ...
Total, of the estate of 10 hectares ...
The king, my lord, should give sheep to the gods. If he does not, they will not come down.
Witness Barruqu, chariot driver.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
2 necklace ... ;
Witness Urdu-Nabû, scribe.
... with men, horses, and troops, as many as he wishes, should go ...
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
The very best of health to the king, my lord!
... 1 litre 1 'litre' for the flour ...
If its horns are very pointed: the flood will come.
If Nergal wears a helmet which is not ... : the weapons of Nergal will not be raised against him; he will not be able to enter the city, the city will not be under his control.
4 horses from the king of Mannea, in the treasurer's house;
40 hectares of field in the town of Andillu; Sinqi-Issar, farmer, and his people;
Month Adar (XII), 21st day, eponym year of Bel-šarrani, governor of Kurbail.
... -šulmu, ...
Ahu-nagi ...
... he has made him slip
... , ... il-... , Bel-lešir, 3 hectares of field, ...
He (the god Marduk) looked with pleasure upon my good deeds and he granted me a reign without equal. He made my sovereignty greater than (those of all other) rulers.
Ditto by Nabû, Nusku, Uraš and Nergal!
Inurta-ila'i has contracted and bought it from Šer-idri for x minas of silver.
He places a plate before the god, offers cooked meat, burns juniper and quenches it with water. He places a plate before the god, burns juniper and quenches it with water, places two kamanu-cakes on the table, burns two kamanu-cakes on the censer, pours two libation bowls of beer on the censer, pours two libation bowls of beer on the pithos.
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether NN or his sons or grandsons, seeks a lawsuit or litigation against NN, his son,
Witness Mannu-ki-Libbali, scribe.
... the upper and the lower part are equal ... the sky, may he make it bright, and may he make the earth shake! And may he make the foundation of the city, the city of the gate of the underworld, shake! May he make the foundation of the city, the city of the gate of the underworld, shake!
... Is it pleasing to your great divinity?
If Jupiter becomes steady in the morning: enemy kings will be reconciled.
... Irra-Aššur
... a bowl (of wine):
10 shekels of silver, capital, belonging to Edu-šallim, at the disposal of Eriba-Adad.
Witness Sakkî, porter.
... the people living in the city Uṣû ... I brought to the land ... by means of a canal that I had dug. I settled therein the people of the land Amurru, the people of the land ... , the people of the land Ḫatti, the people of the land Elam, ... , the people of the land Meluḫḫa, ... , the people of the land ... , the people of the land ... , the people of the land ... , the people of the land ... , the people of the land ... , the people of the land ... , the people of the land
This is the wording of the tablet.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
The women about whom the king, my lord, spoke — they are to be fed and watered in the storehouses. They are to be treated as if they were the head of the king. If it is acceptable to the king, they should be placed in one storehouse only.
... horse ...
(As for) Gugū, the king of the land Lydia, who did not honor my treaty, who did not respect the oath(s sworn) by the gods, (and) who did not revere the kings, my ancestors, he brought about the destruction of his royal dynasty by the command of (the god) Aššur (and) the goddess Bēl (Zarpanītu). He sent (his) body (and) the body of his royal wife to the underworld.
Husâ, gardener; 3 sons; 3 women; 4 ... ; 1 hectare of field; 1 house; ... ; 1 vineyard in the town of Inurta-Issar, near the city of ... ; in all, belonging to Hanatî.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Witness Šarru-emuranni.
(As for) the rest of his magnates, including Nabû-šumu-iškun, a son of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), who had fled from my battle array, ... they (the gods) remembered their good deeds.
The money is paid completely.
May Aššur and Ištar bless the king, my lord!
These two are dead. For how long have they been dead? They are constantly saying bad things about the servant of his lord's household. I am dying of hunger.
(As for) Uallî, ... , they cut off his head (and) ... They placed Uallî, his son, on his (own) throne. They made (the god) Aššur, the goddess Mullissu, ... the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, ... the great gods, my lords, bow down at my feet. They (the gods) constantly blessed me with a good, pleasing word. (As for) Erisinni, his heir designate, they sent (him) to Nineveh and ...
If a planet becomes visible in the month of Inurta: rain and flood.
Bel-ahu-... , chariot owner;
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Bariki or Abail or their sons or grandsons or brothers or nephews or governor, or any relative of theirs, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Remanni-Adad, his sons and grandsons,
A tablet of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, to Tammaritu, king of Elam: I am well, you can be glad.
Month Tebet (X), 25th day, eponym year of Dadi-nuri.
I will set out ...
... he ...
2 ... s, the woman ... ;
The word of Arbela is as lofty as heaven.
... ra-himu
Total 4 seahs each.
If the moon is seen together with the sun: reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the world will make the throne last long.
... and because of your kindness
The lord, who in his wrath ... ,
Abda, shepherd ... ; NN, ... ; total, x people.
All this is the fault of the king.
... servant of NN
If the sun rises in a cloudbank: the king will raise his weapons.
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract, whether Asî or his sons or grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Tarhundapî,
If Aššur and Šarur, the stars of the sting of Scorpius, are dark: the weapons of Akkad will raise up. The sting of Scorpius is the great lord Pabilsag.
When he had made up his mind to send ... , he wrote to Bel-iqiša, the son of Bunanu, saying: "... Send me barley and straw ... and letters ... !"
... is overturned. The top of the lung is split...
... the governors
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me,
Witness Nabû-...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Arbayu or his brothers or his nephews or any relative of his, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Ninuayu and his brothers,
all ...
60 hectares of field in Dur-Nanaya; Dadî, farmer, and his people;
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šarru-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! The land of the king my lord is well.
I gave orders ...
... the king, my lord
If on the 15th day the moon and sun are seen together: a strong enemy will raise his weapons against the land; the enemy will tear down the city gates.
Witness Se'-imme.
My enemies have plundered my father's house, and they have roasted meat over me. They have roasted me in every possible way.
Say to the king, my lord, that the bread of the temples is excellent and the offerings of the temples are fine. May Uraš and Belet-ili grant life to the king, my lord, for ever!
... the aegis
Witness Aplaya, ...
in the morning ...
Just as a female kid gives birth to male kids, so may you give birth to male and female kids.
Belonging to Yabâ, queen of Tiglath-pileser (III), king of Assyria.
They shall contest in their lawsuit and not succeed.
Esarhaddon, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, appointee of the god Enlil, priest of the god Aššur, ... governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, ... favorite of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, great queen, favorite of the goddess Ištar of Arbela, ... , the king who provides for the sanctuaries of the great gods, the one who reveres the great gods, the one who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of their great
Month Tammuz (IV), ... th day, eponym year of Aššur-duru-uṣur.
Liphur-ilu,
After ...
... 20 ...
... is good
... the Gurabunu ...
Now the king will say: "...
Three times I marched to the lands Nairi. I conquered the extensive lands Nairi from the land Tummu to the land Daiēnu, the lands Ḫimua, Paīteru, and Ḫabḫu. I received tribute from the horses (and) mules that they had.
... Aššur-šumu-ka''in
... the messenger of the king of Elam ... they have taken away from them.
My heart was revived, my mind was soothed. I stood up and (then) lifted my hands (in prayer) to the god Enlil, the father of the gods, the god Marduk.
... in the palace
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 7th day, eponym year of Bel-lu-dari, governor of Tillê.
The Tebilti River, a tempestuous flood (of water) which had flowed from distant days by the side of the palace (and) had shaken its base when its flood was in full spate:
Witness Nabû-dur-beliya.
To Sennacherib:
Belet-ili is placed before him ...
... the singer who is to be praised
I had statues of my royal majesty, which are made of silver, gold, (and) copper, created through the craft of the deities Ninagal, Ninkilim, (and) Ninkura, for the sake of ensuring my good health, (and) to please the heart(s) of the gods who support me. I set (them) up in their (proper) positions. I made (them) hold in their hands the holy objects of the great gods. The priest of the goddess Gula, my beloved wife, was constantly reciting (their) pra
of the people of my country ...
Now then I am sending you ... and ...
The king knows that we are not to argue with our adversary. And we are not to build a house. The king should appoint a man in his service. They should tell us whatever news there is, and the royal bodyguard should appoint us over his servant's house.
... him
In the left side of the 'finger' there is a hole. The lower part is elevated...
From the beginning of my reign until my seventeenth palû, I defeated all together the Ituʾu, Ruʾuʾu, Ḫamrānu, Luḫuʾatu, Nabatu, Ḫindaru, Ruʾuʾu, (and) Liʾtaʾu, as many as there were on the banks of the Tigris, Euphrates, and Zab Rivers, and (on the banks of) the Upper Sea of the Setting Sun. I annexed them to Assyria (and) placed a eunuch of mine
Witness Tabalayu.
May the throne be stable! Say to the enemies of the king, my lord:
NN, gate-guard;
The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
Concerning the ... about which Pan-Aššur-... said, I have seen 32 ... s. Those ...
Aplaya has contracted and bought them from them.
... before Marduk, the governor
The people of the land Akkad rejoiced greatly (and) were filled with joy. The people of the land Akkad, the great people, heard the report of the mighty deeds of the great gods and were filled with joy. The people of the land Akkad, the people of the land of the god Sîn, the god who created them, rejoiced greatly and were filled with joy.
Witness Mannu-...
Monument of Aššur-mukin-paluṭ, governor of the city Aššur, who ... , chief of Aššur, who ... Aššur of the land Ša-Aššur, governor of the city Aššur.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. The very  best of health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the  king, my lord! May Aššur, Bel, Nabû, Sin, Šamaš, Ninurta and Nergal guard the life of the king, my lord!
Afterwards, Uaiteʾ (Iautaʾ), his son, sat on his throne. He saw the might of the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk) and Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Nusku, (and) Nergal, the great gods, my lords, and bowed down at my feet. He sent (a message of) submission and appealed to my lordly majesty. He sent before me Er
The 'finger' is present. The 'outside' rides upon the 'cap.'
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 9th day, eponym year of La-baši, chief of trade (657 B.C.).
I shall tell it to him, and he will listen.
The Puqudu, who had been submissive to me, saw the might of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, and (then) trusted in the mercilessness of the god Aššur and the strength of my royal majesty. They sent a message to Pilaqqu, king of Egypt, who had cast off the yoke of my lordship, and they (the Egyptians) beseeched me to conclude a treaty with him. I gave the treaty to him, and he kissed my feet. (As) he had appealed to the god Ašš
The king, my lord, received the magnates whom the king had sent to the treasurer, saying: "... "
The captives who came here
The king, my lord, should have a look at the ...
Seal of A... ,
I had a canopy of musukkannu-wood, a durable wood, which is clad with silver, (vi 10) installed over them. I fastened bands of shining gold on magnificent doors of white cedar and I installed (them) in their gates. I had the figure of the god Marduk, the great lord, (vi 15) who was clad with brilliance, made and I set (it) up in its doorway.
1, Nabû-šarru-uṣur, governor of Nineveh;
... the fine ...
the women of Cutha ...
8 hectares, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto;
The king is very well indeed; he has recovered completely. He has recovered because of the bath and the hot water.
x minas of silver
... to Damascus
Witness NN.
I wrote to Necho (and) gave him the following order: “Bring me back all the gold that you took from him, and I will give you a golden scepter, a golden tiara, (and) a golden dagger, and I will put it on you. I will also give you a golden statue of me, and you will put it on you.”
The king, my lord, can be glad indeed about the good water of the canal.
... these
We have finished the work assignment which was given to the king, my lord, and have been making the statues. As soon as we have finished the rest of the work, we shall send them to the king, my lord.
If the moon at its appearance wears a crown: the king will reach the highest rank; the land will dwell as if in pastures near the city.
Now then Hutadia, the ... , has taken all the silver, gold, precious stones, and possessions without number, as well as the utensils of copper, which I gave to Aššur-ili-muballissu, and sold them to the land of Šapittu. I am herewith sending them to the king, my lord.
in the charge of Ahabû, commander-of-fifty ... , Akkullanu,
... people
Good health to the king, my lord!
The Pleiades will come close to the Yoke star (and) stand in the Pleiades.
... he wrote to me
Witness Kubabu-ila'i.
12 shields of silver, whose bosses are decorated with the head(s) of lion and wild bull, (and) whose edges are inlaid with ... ;
As to the news of the district of Nargi, they have said to Kibibi and Dusku: "The king of Ellipi has given us the whole district." They have given the city to Marduk-šarru-uṣur, saying: "Do whatever you wish." He has not yet entered the district, but has said to the people of the country as follows:
(As for) Ummanaldašu (Ḫumban-ḫaltaš III), he fled naked and took to the mountain(s). I pursued him and brought him down. I cut off his head (and) flayed it. I placed (his head) on the neck of Nabû-qīa-ṣabat, the Sinnean, (and) I sent (him) to Elam as a gift.
Witness Marduk-šarru-ibni, cohort commander.
1 house, 1/2 threshing-floor ...
2 tureens of bouillon;
an estate of 2 hectares of land adjoining the street and the town of Bit-Amukani;
Adad-bani-apli ...
3 cooking pots of copper, each of 1 seah (c. 200 litres);
Month ... , 19th day, eponym year of Marduk-šarru-uṣur.
Bel-uballiṭ, NN, ... kinnu, his adolescent son, 2 daughters, a total of 5 persons —
Aššur-nadin-šumi
Lions on the river bank.
With the support of my great divinity, which I had encouraged,
... Now then
The base of the middle 'finger' of the lung is 'bound.'
They are free from encumbrances. The chief singer has the usufruct of the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ... s, the ...
10 ... ;
What is it that he/they are plotting?
Nabû-šumu-iddina ...
... me, the Aramean ...
The king's word to the commander-in-chief:
You set up a rikshaw, a portable censer, and a torch, and bring it to the watchtowers.
I had a stele made and I wrote on it the mighty deeds of the gods. I erected (it) for the gods, my helpers.
Witness Nabû'a.
Witness Šep-...
Witness NN. Witness Ahatâ.
adjoining a street
... x cubits wide, adjoining Ubru-Ašared
In Iyyar (II), on the 26th day, the royal bodyguard came out.
Adad-le'i, prefect;
in ...
Witness ... -Adad, ...
A tablet of Bel-aha-iddina to Iddin-ahi, his father. Good health to my father! May Šamaš give you long days!
He (the god Marduk) commanded me to kill, plunder, (and) loot the enemy.
Concerning the statues of the kings which are in Harran about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "The month is good, the day is good, when it enters there, it will be well" — ... for the offerings of the dead. This is its interpretation:
This is of ...
Afterwards ... , when he came ... , he said to you: "Come ... "
In one ...
... I went out
I cut down the trees that were the support of Aššur, my lord, and I had the nobles and the elders of the city Anšan, their helpers, trample them under my feet. I had them carry baskets of earth and I had them make bricks. Ahi-yababa, the son of a nobody, whom I had brought up from Bit-Adini and made into my personal guard, (and) who had grasped the feet of my lordly majesty, (and) the spears of the city Anšabis, the helpers of the
(As for) Nabû-šuma-ēreš, the šandabakku (governor of Nippur) who did not honor (my) treaty, he suffered from dropsy, (that is) “full water.”
... of Ninurta ...
100 hectares of land ...
... one baker ... to the king about the chief eunuch ... Daniya and Bel-... said, and ...
Witness Il-qatar, royal bodyguard.
Send a letter to Nabû-iqiša concerning the letter which Naṣibi sent to him.
May they grant you happiness and physical well-being, and may they establish you as king, my lord!
I have not asked the Lidiaeans, nor have I asked the Luqeans.
... very
The man is not a criminal ...
By the gods of the king, my lord:
Marduk and Zarpanitu, the gods,
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract, whether these men or any relative of theirs, or their cohort commander, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Amurru-Nergal,
... Kenî
11th day.
and his people, ... ,
News of the Urarṭian: ... the ... of the ... emissary of the Mannean ... oxen and sheep ... the Aramean ... : "Therein ...
He shall pay in Tebet (X).
When he sent (his) messenger to the king of the land of the Ḫilakku, saying: “May the king who is loved by the god Ṣilulu not be hostile to you! May he send you his army and his battle troops, who will not let you go out alive! May he make you stand over the kings, his fathers, and may he make you rule the land of the Rūu, which he has conquered! May he give you the kingship of all of the four quarters! May he make you stand over your enemies and may he kill fifty sons of
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
On the 5th day Aššur-belu-... came to me with a report of the king, my lord. He told me this ...
To ... , our lord:
Witness NN, son of Bel-eriba.
— Venus stands in Anunitu.
a cup of quinces;
If he has passed on the right side of the sheep, he will not succeed.
I conquered from the source of the River Subnat to Mount Nikippa, ... , as far as Mount Urummeš-Adad. I subdued the land of the people of the land of the Šubaru to my feet. I annexed to Assyria the land of the people of the land of the Zamua, the land of Puzur-Aššur, the land of the people of the land of the Yaldeans, (and) the land of the people of the land of the Yasubigallians.
... throne (land) adjoining Aššur-...
... them
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
1 ... of Tik-kamuri;
A thigh, a shoulder, outer cuts;
When he comes out, he will enter into the presence of the king. Let them do as they deem best. The king should decide whether it should be done twice or not.
... the decision of the king, my lord,
Tiglath-pileser, conqueror of enemies, subduer of all (enemies), the one who makes bricks (and) builds houses,
to ...
Barik-ilu, the temple steward, who had fled from the Akitu House, has now come to the king's presence. The king should ask him what he has to say.
Witness Sama.
... the governor of Harran
cohort commanders;
a 2-seah jar of bittersweet beer;
... should have examined ...
... -le'i
I said: "... will come ... "
From 30 sons ...
... I am dying because of it.
Ashur-belu-usur,
... the king should ...
of the day ...
Palace of Shalmaneser, great king, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), great king, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also great king, strong king, king of the universe, (and) king of Assyria.
... the king, my lord
... Dur-Yakin
Concerning what you asked me: "...
... he rejoiced and ...
... the front red, of the country;
If Jupiter reaches Regulus and follows it, and Regulus reaches Jupiter and follows it, and Jupiter reaches the Pleiades and follows it: there will be a revolt, variant: there will be an uprising, variant: there will be an insurrection.
... ;
... whom the king, my lord, installed in the land of Assyria, from Tiglath-pileser (III), king of Assyria, the father who had engendered me, to the kings of Assyria.
The king ... before the window ...
— On the 14th day the moon was seen together with the sun.
of ... archers
Kubabu-ila'i, the king, my lord, is our lord. He is our lord in Til-Aššuri. This was the news. We are herewith sending it to the king, my lord.
until ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Go and inspect the fortresses on the border of Muṣaṣir!" — I have inspected them; they are very well.
450 silver (shekels) belonging to the chief cupbearer, at 1 wooden chest.
The king goes straight to the palace.
Sîn, Ningal, Rēš, king of Enlil, king of Anu:
The crown prince is doing very well; he has set out on the road and is on his way. He has gone a distance of 2 leagues, and has arrived at the border.
Total 1,112 (shekels), the 29th of Iyyar (II).
As to what the king, our lord, wrote to us: "...
... to guard ...
2 'litres' of midru-bread;
NN, ... ;
Now, concerning the horses trained to the yoke about which I said to my brother: "Let them come here" —
... his people
... I will bring
Seal of NN, owner of the women being sold.
Šamaš-eriba, servant of Hakkubu —
who surrounded ...
Witness ... -Adad.
The gates of the ziggurrat are the gates of the four quarters. The names of the lands and the mountains are written upon them. I named them (as follows): “The Gate of the King’s Entrance.”
... the reign of the king will be long ... the reign of the king will be stable ...
In Kislev (IX), the 15th day, eponymy of Šulmu-šarri, governor of the city Ḫalzi-adbar (691 B.C.).
Witness Nabû-da''in, ditto.
Witness Mannu-lu-šulmu.
He said as follows: "The doors of the temple of Sîn, of the temple of Šamaš, and of the temple of Nikkal which are to be plated with silver are not finished. I shall finish them by the 1st of Tishri (VII)."
in ...
... the series
The lands Bīt-Ḫamban, Sumurzu, Bīt-Barrû, Bīt-Zualzaš, Bīt-Matti,
Adar (XII), the harvest of Sivan (III).
(Property) of Aššur-mukin-pir'i, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (I), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur: property of the city Kār-Tukultī-Ninurta. Šerua-eṭerat.
I named it “The Palace of the Mountain.” I laid its foundations on top of the foundation of the wall. I surrounded it with slabs of mountain stone. I built it from top to bottom. I named it “The Palace of the Mountain.” I named the gate of the god Aššur “The Gate of the Mountain.” I named the gate of the god Enlil “The Gate of the Mountain.” I named the gate of the goddess Mullissu “The Gate of the Mountain.” I named the gate of the god Enlil and the goddess Mullissu “The Gate of the Mountain
The king, my lord, will catch ...
The silver shall increase by two minas or three minas per mina, according to the standard of Aššur and Mullissu. When the work is finished, they shall pay the silver in full.
a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
... vineyard in Til-Zanî; Manî, gardener, and his people;
... exorcist(s)
... of field, 1 house, and a barnyard in the town of ...
who did not keep this treaty of theirs,
... ;
2 'litres' of midru-bread; 2 'litres' of spiced bread.
... the king, my lord, said
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
Now, let the king, my lord, decide what to do about this matter.
Of the 24th day. Care of Šamaš-ibni.
On my eighth campaign, I marched against Dunānu, son of Bēl-iqīša, to the land Gambulu, which had not bowed down to the yoke of the king of the land Elam. With my mighty battle array, I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the city Ša-pī-Bēl, his fortified city, which is situated on the banks of the Nabû River.
Concerning the captives about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me,
An estate of x hectares adjoining the road to Issete, adjoining Nabû-šezibanni, adjoining Nabû-... -iddina —
When the king, my lord, ...
Mugallu the Melidean ...
... flag
Witness Issar-šumu-iddina, scribe.
Ditto, ditto! May all the gods who are mentioned by name in this treaty tablet make you like iron and lead, and may they not let you live.
The king, my lord, must not say: "He has written to you, and you have mobilized troops and sent them." What have you seen?
Ištar of the reed hut, the Lady of the stool,
The heart of the sheep is normal...
... Bel-šallim
Witness Gi...
Whoever alters his gate, may the god Adad strike him with terrible lightning, may he destroy his field like a flood, and may he (the god Adad) speak evil of him.
... bedroom
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Mannu-ki-Arbail, his sons and grandsons, his brothers and nephews, shall place 10 minas of refined silver and 15 minas of pure gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Witness Na'id-Adad.
I carried off people and booty from the land Elam, which is in the territory of the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Šarrat-Kidmuri, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, and Nergal. I added (them) to my troops. I made the troops of my royal majesty take the road to my governors and magnates. I ... ed my ... like a mural crown.
... the woman ...
... in this manner ...
... of Nineveh ... he cut down ...
Witness Remut-ili.
The priest of the ziggurrat and the temples go (away).
... in the land of Akkad ...
... arrow
I have sent a report to the king, my lord, concerning the sacrifices to the Inner City.
... king of the world, king of Assyria, ... the god Marduk, the goddess Zarpanītu, the beloved of the god Nabû, the goddess Tašmētu, ... governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, son of Esarhaddon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, ... who ... to the foundation(s) ... kingly descent ... his ... to the kingship ...
... I asked him, saying: "Tell me!" He said: "Nabû-mušallim
... his sons
Nabû-pir'u-šagal;
... to the king
Total, of Šulmu-ahhe, son of Uadi.
to ...
And the rest of the ... of Assyria has also been cut off. Let the chief ... , the call-up officers, the ... , and the (royal)  enter into their presence.
Urda-Nabû has written a letter to Bel-eṭir and to Šamaš-zeru-iqiša.
Nabû-eṭir-šamê, a šandabakku, has appealed to the king, my lord, saying:
Witness Šar-Issar, ...
1 hand-ring of gold, 1 mina 4 1/4 shekels in weight; 1 arm-ring of gold, 1/3 mina 1/3 shekels in weight, the back (red), of the country; 3 shekels, Šumma-Issaran, cohort commander;
At that time, I was revering him, and I was praying to Enlil, the gods, and Marduk:
At that time, the temple of the god Sîn, which Shalmaneser (I), son of Ashurnasirpal (II), a king of the past, a forefather of mine, had built — that temple had become old and its walls had buckled. I removed its dilapidated section(s) down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I rebuilt that temple and made its structure larger than before. I deposited my monumental inscription.
owner of the ... being sold.
Witness NN, cohort commander.
I had foundation inscriptions made, had the mighty victories that I achieved over my enemies written on them, and I erected (them) at their gates for ever after.
... outside
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you leave from Bit-Barsipi until now?" — I have now come to you. I have seen your messenger. On the first day of Shebat (XI) the messenger of Bit-Barsipi and Nabû-šumu-iddina came to us. I sent the messengers of the king, my lord, to greet the king, my lord. And I have sent my messengers with them.
The mountains, the rivers, the city of Duri, the cella, the palace, the ... ,
Does your great divinity know it? Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
1, Aplaya, palace herald;
... his ...
Review Palace of the New Corps.
... ;
The coils of the colon are 14 in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
a flagon of beer of bruised grain.
... the star of Karabu
the wife of the palace manager;
... that palace, the one in which the former prince had lived, had become dilapidated and old. I removed its dilapidated parts, ... I made my royal statue and the statue of the god Aššur and the goddess Ninurta ... I offered pure sacrifices to them ... I made (them) stand in a position of dignity and honor.
... they shall glaze the bricks.
From Ašaredu, son of Damqaya, servant of the king.
... in its entirety
Witness Adad-šumu-iškun, ...
Total, of the temple of Nabû, his priest.
... and in ...
The money is paid completely. That woman is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
x+34 horses,
... their speech
Total, Aššur-matu-taqqin, village manager.
a total of 164 Kushite horses and 35 cavalry mounts, 6 mules —
... he has taken care of
... the ... s who came with me, his associates
... he says: "Nobody has taken him into ...
... the Urarṭian
From Issar-šumu-ereš.
... have been built
... The left of the 'finger' is split. The breast-bone is thick...
... ;
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord! The fort and the zakku are well. The servants of the king, my lord, are well.
On my return march, I defeated all together the Tuʾumuna, Riḫiḫu, Ubudu, Gibrê, Maliḫu, Gurumu, Ubulu, Damunu, Gambulu, Ḫindaru, Ruʾuʾa, Puqudu, Ḫamrānu, Ḫagarānu, Nabatu, (and) Liʾtaʾu. I carried off their substantial booty.
of the king ...
Witness Adad-naṣir, ...
Tab-shar-Aššur, son of Aššur-bēl-kala.
... the king, my lord
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
Witness Nabû-...
... there is
The king's word to NN: I am well; you can be glad.
3 bags of sesame;
Witness Isanayu.
... to Marduk-aplu-iddina
NN and his people, NN and his people,
I am the one who reveres the gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl and Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela, the father who created me, and who has constantly sought out the truth. With the support of the gods Šamaš and Adad, by the command of their exalted divinity, he (the god Marduk) looked steadfastly upon me and he made me greater than (all of) those who sit on (royal) daises. He placed the people of
... he will die.
The daytime of the 11th day we will perform ... , which we are doing ...
... my father's house ... you have glazed bricks. The two sons of the lady Kakkullanu, in all five persons, a bed with its frame, three blankets, a chair, a table,
Tab-shar-Ashur,
The halo of the star Spica is very dark. It is seen in the morning watch.
Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it? Does your great divinity know it?
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
On my eighth campaign, I marched against Dunānu, son of Bēl-iqīša, to the land Gambulu. He had not submitted to the king of the land Elam (and) had not come to my yoke. (ii 10') I crossed the mighty rivers of the land Gambulu in flood. I conquered the city Ša-pī-Bēl, his fortified city, which is on the bank of the Nada River.
Witness NN, scribe.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
... enter ...
I conquered the city Adummatu, a fortified city, the dwelling of the Arabs, which Sennacherib, king of Assyria, my father, had conquered and whose property, possessions, gods, (and) booty he had carried off to Assyria. Hazael, the Arabean, fled with his booty before me and took to the mountains. I pursued him and brought about his defeat. I brought down from the mountains the gods Atar-samayin, Dāya, Nuhšaya, Ruṣuʾa, Abirill
If the moon is eclipsed in Sivan (III): Adad will devastate.
When he ... to the king, who was sitting on the throne,
Dayyan-Inurta,
And I will give orders to NN. He shall not be detained.
Witness Riba-ahhe.
Month of Ḫibur, eponymy of Šuma-iškun, the god Sîn.
Month of ... , ... th day, eponym year of ...
Disregard what happens after my stipulated term...
From Balasî.
... I did and ... I made them carry ... in all the lands that I conquered.
Now then I am writing to you: let me send you ... people who are not loyal, and let the governor ... them.
The Urarṭian has not agreed to give them back. In his place, he has ... ed the son of Irtaškannu ...
May Nabû (and) Marduk bless the king, my lord! May they grant long days, fullness of old age, and complete health to the king, my lord!
Zar-Issar, his son of 4 spans' height; ... ;
... him ...
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also king of Assyria: booty from the city Ruqūtu of Bīt-Adini.
... you did not return ...
Total, x ... s at the disposal of Kiṣir-... , whom the king gave.
Witness Šumma-Adad. Witness Ahu-illika.
NN, son of Abi-haza, his brother, whom Našî-ilu, the sheikh, son of Hattâ, had taken to Babylon in the time of the siege —
I brought back 10 mules and 10 donkeys, which had been left in the palace of the city Kalḫu. I received 47,007 people, male and female, captives from all of the lands of Yadburu, 5,000 elders of the land Sūḫu, the lands Ḫindānu (and) Paiteru.
Palace of Šamšī-Adad, son of Išme-Dagan (II) ...
Witness Šep-Issar, servant of the governor of Birtu.
... As to what you wrote: "When ... , they attacked me and Marduk-aplu-... , and ... , and ... , and ... , (and) Aššur, Bel and Nabû, my gods, like ...
are placing ... upon them.
I received gold (and) shining silver sling straps as their wrist-trappings, (and) slashed off their belts with sharp swords. I took away gold (and) silver belt-daggers as their waist-trappings.
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, chariot driver.
... returned
The coils of the colon are 16 in number...
... a scarf
I received the payment of Ianzû, the king of the land Naʾiri, in the city Ḫubuškia, a fortified city. Six of his fortified cities ... which ... I carried off ... eight fortified cities together with the settlements in their environs, which Ursa, the Urarṭian, had captured ...
... fish ...
The lower part is elevated ... The left of the gall bladder is attached.
a cup of quinces;
10 talents 15 minas ...
— Jupiter stood there one month over its period.
x+1 cloaks, the front red, ... ;
The land of Akkad will become happy in the steppe; the mood of the troops will be good; the king will become happy.
NN, his son, of 3 spans' height,
3 ... ;
I gave the gold to them, saying: "When you have finished the work of the god Uṣur-amāssu and the temple of the goddess Muṣaṣir, you will make a display of the wealth of Nanaya."
The 'strength' is absent.
I joyfully entered that palace, which is in Babylon, and (then) I opened its treasury and brought out gold, silver, gold (and) silver utensils, precious stones, all kinds of possessions (and) property, a substantial treasure, (together with) his palace women, his palace attendants, courtiers, all of the craftsmen, as many as there were, (and) his palace attendants, and I counted (them) as booty.
The king, my lord, should know that the Šubrian has gone ...
If they are killed or captured,
And don't be negligent about your work!
The series is finished. The omens which were written for the ascension are complete. It has been written for two days. The king, my lord, can be glad.
They are doing the work.
Sangu-Marduk, the lord of the temple of Ea, the one who opens the door of the underworld, the one who opens the door of the netherworld, the one who opens the door of the apsû, the one who opens the door of the underworld, the one who opens the door of the netherworld, the one who opens the door of the apsû, the one who opens the door of the underworld, the one who opens the door of the netherworld, the one who opens the door of the apsû, the one who opens the door of
From the city Uaia, I took the road to the district of Ianzû, king of the land Naʾiri. Yanzû, king of the land Naʾiri, came out from the city Ḫubuškia, a royal city of his, and came before me. I received from him tribute, horses, oxen, and sheep and goats in the city Ḫubuškia, a city of his.
Witness Huhhazu.
My battle troops who are in the land Mangisu — which is inside (the territory of) the city Sumandir —
... to the king
... he seized
Now there are people who are running away. I have sent my messenger to them, and he is bringing them to them. If they are in my country, I shall bring them to him, and if the river has crossed, he can cross it.
The money is paid completely. That field is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
a basket of (mixed) fruit.
Zizî,
... he asked
An estate of 2 hectares of land adjoining Mannu-ki-Arbail, adjoining the ditch —
From the 20th day of the month ...
... and he made him sit on the throne of the four quarters. He ... and he made him great. He made the land of the Sealand, which is before the god Ninurta, bow down at his feet. He ... king of Assyria, property of Ešarra.
... is curled ...
... is wide (f.)
... and he made the people ... he built and he named it ...
If Venus disappears in Ab (V) from the 1st to the 30th day in the west: there will be rains; the harvest of the land will prosper.
of the days ...
... , eunuch of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, the lord of lords, who, from the beginning of his reign until the end, has trusted in his lord, has stood in my presence, and has marched at my side, has guarded my kingship like a woman in my palace, and has kept watch over my royal majesty —
... gold rings, for his servants;
To the king, my lord: your servant Gabbu-ana-Aššur.
Kush,
fumigants ... ;
Witness ... ayate.
... before the king of Babylon
1 seah 1 'litre' of regular offering loaves;
... he seized Nergal on account of Enlil and returned him to his place.
Adad-hutni, farmer; 2 sons; 1 man; 1 woman; 1 son; 1 woman; 1 daughter, weaned: a total of 5 people.
adjoining the house of Bahianu, adjoining the house of Daniati-il,
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Month Iyyar (II), 5th day, eponym year of Gambulu.
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
Prayers to Ea.
Witness Nabû-zeru-iqiša.
To the king, my lord: your servant Mannu-ki-Ninua. Good health to the king, my lord! The land of the king my lord is well.
From this very fact it is clear that I have not been negligent in my efforts to perform the ritual of the city god. On the 7th day, the festival day, we shall perform it in its entirety.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, (or) jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
... the former officials
I will cut off their ...
20, his captives;
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: good for Akkad, bad for Elam.
... of Aššur, my lord, who after ... and the tribute to Aššur, my lord, with the support of Aššur, my lord, and the goddess Nergal, my face ... , I received ... the one who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of my lordship, ... my gods, the temple of Aššur, the temple of Šamaš, ... I laid the foundation of my palace.
The king, my lord, should not be negligent ... the eyes of the king, my lord, are ... ; ...
The remainder of the bricks of the large terrace of the city Kār-Tukultī-Ninurta.
We are the ones who are constantly attentive to the will of the god Marduk and the goddess Zarpanītu, and we are the ones who are assiduous towards their shrines.
In the morning, I saw much blood on the gold which I sent to the king, my lord. I wrote to the king, my lord, as follows: "Let the king, my lord, write to his servant that the king ...
... I wrote to the king ...
We have brought the men to the king my lord's designated place. We shall go and bring the logs, and we shall then return and bring them in.
From Inurta-kudurrī-uṣur, the king.
I marched to the city Melid, which is on the border of the land Ḫatti. I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the city. I captured alive the king of the land Isua and the king of the land Sūḫu. I brought them to my land.
... half a 'litre' each;
... much ...
I bowed down to the yoke of the gods Aššur, Mullissu, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela, the great gods, my lords, who had encouraged me and given me confidence, and I did not release the people under my authority. At that time, the gods, in their exalted wisdom, looked with pleasure upon my good deeds and
... from
Care of Aššur-killanni.
He is in my presence ...
Dutanu ...
The king, my lord, has done a favour for the house of bricks of my father and Nikkal. He has provided a house for the house of bricks of Nikkal.
Witness Issar-taqi-nishi.
Nabû-eṭiranni,
Moreover, I had a palace, a replica of a Hittite palace, which is called bīt-ḫilāni in the language of the goddess Bēlet-ilī, constructed over the women (and) the palace personnel who had been taken captive by my army. I had a stele made and I erected (it) at its gates.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
... the people will go to Assyria ...
Palace of Tiglath-pileser, king of the universe, king of Assyria: (this is) the reed basket of the canal of Nineveh.
105 (items): a silver pomegranate, a silver bowl, a silver jar of oil, 100 oxen, 10 sheep, 10 mules, 10 donkeys, 10 camels, 10 wagons, 10 carts, 10 carts with harnesses, 10 teams of horses, 10 teams of mules, 10 teams of donkeys, 10 teams of pigs,
The middle of the 'station' is effaced ...
... ;
... Man-ki-šarri
... Ahu-duri
... the 'path' is curled.
The chief of trade and the chief of the female recruits have not yet returned there, so I cannot give them out. Now let me give out 30 houses there, and let the men of Nabû-ṣalli, the prefect, and the cohort commander stay in the town of Hirsamaš. Let them bring them here, and let them give them fields and orchards there.
Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, has contracted and bought them from Issar-duri and Lu-šakin for 4 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
1 urnutu-garment, ditto, the edging ... , the front (red), of an ox, 1/2 talent in weight;
Tab-shar-Ashur, son of Bel-aplu-iddina,
2 sheep, (and) a bowl (of wine):
Witness ... -abu-uṣur. Witness Abi-ram, city overseer.
Month Elul (VI), 13th day.
Now the messengers of the son of Zeruia, who went to the king my lord's orders concerning the city of Kisik,
And the heart of the king, my lord, is very glad indeed, saying: "What else? Your father has entrusted you to the care of the king, my lord."
I created a replica of the ziggurrat of Aššur, the seat of the goddess Ištar, which is called “The Seat of the Throne” (and) which is clad with shining silver, and I placed (it) upon a terrace that was 280 cubits long (and) 162 cubits wide. I raised its superstructure 270 courses of brick high. I enlarged the area of the courtyard of the temple of the goddess Ištar 163 courses of brick high. I enlarged
I have performed the sacrifices of the 5th day before Aššur and the gods of the king, my lord, and all of them have been completely sacrificed.
When I seized him and brought him to ... , he said to me: "Why do you hold him?" He had spoken a lie to the king, and they had imposed upon him 3 minas of silver and imposed a fine on him.
In the month of Tammuz (IV), when the tribute of a pot was brought in, they sold one pot for x shekels of silver, one pot for 12 1/2 shekels of silver, and one pot for 3 shekels of silver.
... went
I carried off silver and gold, the property of the land of Sumer and Akkad, the land of Karduniaš (Babylonia), (and) the land of Šubaru, together with substantial booty from the land Elam. I brought within the boundaries of my land (the territory stretching) from the opposite bank of the Lower Zab to the land Elam, the entirety of the land of the king of the land Akkad, and (the territory stretching) from the opposite bank of the Tigris to Mount Ammanappi. I cut down with the
The money is paid completely. Those fields, houses, threshing floors, gardens, wells and grazing land are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
As to the merchants about whom my lord said: "They must not be detained, and silver must not be collected" — I have detained 14 minas of silver.
... 1/2 'litre';
I have appointed them in the service of the king, my lord.
Witness NN, from Hatarikka. Witness NN.
One chariot fighter, two cavalrymen, three mounted archers —
... the ... who ...
... to them ...
He brought before me Yahiqa, his daughter, who had never crossed the sea, and he sent (her) to do obeisance to me. I received from him his daughter and his sisters, together with a large marriage gift. I had mercy on him and (then) I gave (his) son, his offspring, back to him.
From Ašaredu the older.
... the king, our lord,
Their orchards ... Giri-Ba'al ... , 3 emissaries of the town ... have come in with tribute.
... the sun ...
Witness NN.
... the second vizier
At that time the Great Wall of my city Aššur and the Wall of the Lady of the Rising Sun, which kings, my ancestors, had previously built, had become dilapidated and I rebuilt them from top to bottom. I strengthened their foundations more than previously and I laid their foundations on bedrock. I built (and) completed them from top to bottom. I deposited my monumental inscriptions.
... tablets not ...
adjoining the field of Šulmu-beli, son of NN,
... ;
An estate of 4 decares ... ,
Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, chosen of Aššur, vice-regent of Aššur, favorite of the gods Anu and Enlil, whom the god Aššur and the great gods made greater than all of the kings who sit on (royal) daises and made his dominion greater than all of the kings of the four quarters, the one who subdued all of the insubmissive lands, king of all of the lands, the one who gathered together all of the gods of heaven
To the king, my lord: your servant Bel-eriba. Good health to the king, my lord!
... ;
... , the Aruru, Ea-šarru, Mullissu, Babu, Enlil, Adad, Šala, Sin, Nikkal, the Image of the King, Šakkan, Šarrat-eqi, the Lions, the Storm-birds, the Bulls, the Birds, the Crows,
To Esarhaddon, king of Assyria: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord!
Witness Šulmu-šarri.
1 bag of sesame; 6 ditto of kernels.
These five months ...
Witness Mutaqqin-Sin. Witness Adî, merchant.
I created inside it a replica of the (cult) dais of Aššur, a replica of the (cult) dais of the goddess Ištar, which is called “The Seat of Rejoicing” (and) which is clad with shiny zaḫalû-silver, (and) I placed (it) upon a terrace. I made its structure 340 cubits long (and) 288 cubits wide. I made its area larger than that of the ziggurrat of the goddess Ištar, which is
Witness Banî, deputy of the chief physician.
Eponym year of Arbailayu, chief treasurer.
Witness Dugul-la-teši-ibni. Witness Nabû-nadin-ahi.
... and
... has been erased
Witness Mannu-ki-Aššur, ditto.
he turned back ...
... I have heard
20 minas, NN, merchant ...
If a cow gives birth to three (young): the land will change.
... without
161 cavalrymen, 130 chariot-men, 52 grooms, in all 343 —
a 2-seah jar of Assyrian budê-confection;
... is complete
... my chariot in the midst of battle
... 5 citizens of Babylon
... the 'hand'
Total 2: Raṣappa.
... to the king
... my land
I asked ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... Dur-Šamaš-rēša-uṣur.
... houses in Calah, a palace
... from Elam
... wine for the days ...
1 large gold sword, whose weight is 26 1/3 minas of gold;
After the letter of the king had come to me, I sent him to the king, my lord. If I had not sent him, the king would have punished me, and the king would not have pardoned his servant.
... &  beer  &  Ahu-lurši
Moreover, breccia, as much as is needed (for making) burzigallu-bowls, (a stone) that had never been seen before, revealed itself at Kapridargilâ.
This is the rest of the matter.
Witness Nanî, ditto of Nabû.
May a later prince restore it. May he restore my inscribed name to its place. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
or a ... , or a bowman, or a weaver, or a ... ,
Total, of the chariot-horse-trainers.
... of ...
... the ... eans will take ...
These are the water-skin rafts which Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, has appointed for Baal, his servant, to the cities Akkuddu and Dūru in the district of the land Pillatu, and in all the cities on the shore of the Upper Sea, and in the city Gubilu, in Chaldea.
all my cities ...
Witness Kunaya, eunuch of ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Issar-šumu-ereš. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I struck down with the sword the people of the land Bīt-Barrû, who live in the high mountains. I cut off the head of the land Tīl-Ašurri, which is called Pitānu in the language of the people of the land Miḫrānu.
adjoining the field of Nabû-šapik-zeri, adjoining the field of Ammini-il, adjoining the road to Issete, adjoining the mountain, adjoining the field of Abi-ṭab,
1 hectare 1 decare, road of Qumbate, adjoining Qumaya, the road of Qumbate, and the road to Calah;
Land of the Bit-Ammonites
2 seahs, the 21st day;
of the New Palace.
... he will place there.
The servants of Bel-ahhe-riba who came to the king, my lord, saying: "Our brothers are in Na... " — Nergal-ša-... , a royal bodyguard whom the king, my lord, sent with them, has ... ed these ... s of ...
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Bīt-Zabidaya, Uruk, Kullab, Egišnugal, Nēmed-Laguda, Dūr-Yakīn, Kār-Nabû-ašared, (and) the cities on the bank of the Euphrates. I captured eight fortified cities, fortresses of the land Bīt-Yakīn, together with 100 small(er) settlements in their environs.
After I had taken counsel with myself, I appointed him in the service of Nabû-ahhe-bulliṭ, the official in charge of Esagil. I assigned the rest of the temples to Babylon. In this way I made peace.
Shamash-ilaya,
Witness Šamaš-ahu-iddina, physician.
a cup of small onions; a ditto of quinces;
Now, whatever Bel-ušezib has written to the king, the king should do as he deems best.
From this day on, as long as I live, I shall do whatever is good and pleasing to the king, my lord.
... I appointed
Sa'arri;
Month Iyyar (II), 25th day, eponym year of Nabû-šarru-uṣur of Marqasa.
As to what you wrote to me: "The messenger of Mitâ the Phrygian has come to me, saying: 'Uriak has sent 14 men of the Quean to Urarṭu, and they are bringing a letter to me. They are staying in the country of the Phrygians. They have come here.'" — Aššur, Šamaš and Nabû, my gods, have not been mentioned in the words of his mouth.
1 bowl (of wine): the chief confectioner of the palace.
4 ditto of silver;
From Bel-šuma-iškun, lamentation priest.
Now then I am sending them to the king, together with ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-reṣuwa. Good health to the king, my lord!
Sin-duri, ... , his son, his wife, his daughter, ... , Uza... , his prefect, his wife, a total of 10 persons;
at the disposal of ...
He said: "It is a lie that he has been detained. We shall go ... "
11 houses ...
the governor ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "I am concerned about the watch; I have become afraid" —
... their watch is overcast, their work is suspended, and I am (but) a dog.
An estate of 2 hectares of land in the wadi adjoining Ahi-qamu;
... the dead one
Witness Issar-aplu-iddina, son of NN.
... the family of Pa'ê, the legate of the Arabs, ... said to me: "...
strong ...
... in Waisi. The kings have become confident.
The money is paid completely. That ... is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
May Aššur, Enlil and Ninurta, ... , give you victory, power, might and conquest; may they make the king, my lord, attain his wish; may they make the heart of his servant rejoice.
I have sent ...
Witness NN, skipper from Šišil.
Seal of Salamanu, owner of the ... being sold.
In all 2 farmers; 60 hectares of arable land, 40 hectares under cultivation therein. 2 houses; 1 threshing-floor; 1 vegetable garden.
Quraysa, his wife and two daughters, a total of 5;
... he made to disappear.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
You offer cooked meat before Belet-ili, make a flour/incense-offering, pour oil, honey, beer and wine, and sing, “... , O Gipšagalamma, you are the mother of the gods.”
I am well, my lord. My lord is well. The king is well. His ... and I have not written to the king. To the king, my lord, I have not written ...
Aššur-rēša-iši, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Mutakkil-Nusku, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-dān (I) (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur: builder of the temple of the god Enlil.
... he will ...
... to me
You ... the land ...
... The coils of the colon are 14 in number...
Enlil-nāṣir, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Puzur-Aššur (I), vice-regent of the god Aššur:
I set Šarru-lū-dāri, son of Rūkibtu, their former king, over the people of the city Ashkelon and imposed upon him the payment of tribute (and) gifts (in recognition) of my overlordship.
Disregard that the subject of this query, Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, is marching to the city of Enlil, and (that) ...
At that time, the sanctuary of the god Aššur, my lord, which a former king had built, had become dilapidated and old. I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I rebuilt (it) from top to bottom. I deposited my monumental inscription.
in the house of your wrath.
He provides roast meat before Šamaš. He gives incense.
... the vizier
Total 2: Tabnî, scribe of the chief eunuch of the crown prince.
The kurgarrûs and the Sasanu who are being released and who are going down to the underworld, are Enlil and Illil. Illil and Enlil are going down to the underworld.
Witness NN, chief ...
From ... hiya.
... he held back ... Taharqa ... five times in the constellations ... the Babylonians ...
... his servant wrote to him:
... and his people
Adad-nerari (III),
The foundation of the terrace of the Inner City.
Witness Daulî, ditto.
If the gall bladder is flattened on the right side: defeat.
x minas of silver, Ram... , merchant.
Witness Šamaš-šallim, chariot driver.
If the moon is surrounded by a black halo: the month holds rain. — Clouds will be gathered.
I settled the people of the lands conquered by me therein. I placed a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over them.
... the city of Aššur
In ... many days the sun ... did not rise ...
... let them speak
If the Old Man star comes close to the top of the moon and stands there: the king will stand in triumph.
and he will not abandon the city in the hands of the enemy ...
Moreover, (as for) Ṣidqâ, the king of the city Ashkelon who had not bowed down to my yoke, I forcibly removed the gods of his father’s house, himself, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his brothers, (and other) offspring of his father’s house and took him to Assyria.
And concerning the Lady of Akkad about whom I wrote to the king, my lord: "She has been taken to the Akitu House" —
May a later prince restore its weakened (portions) (and) return my inscribed name to its place.
17 (sheep), owners of the meal;
May DNN bless the king, my lord! May they consolidate the foundation of the royal throne of the king, my lord!
Now then we shall keep the watch of Tebet (X) and write to the king, our lord.
... in ...
... Arzabâ ... in the middle of Kumme ... of Assyria. If the treasurer says, I shall seize and bring (him). I am going.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Il-amara or his sons, grandsons, brothers or nephews, or his labour-duty superior,
Concerning the substitute king about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let him go to the province of ... !" —
... the halo of the moon ...
The temple of the god Aššur, which Shalmaneser (I), son of Adad-nārārī (I), king of Assyria, a king who preceded me, had previously built — (this temple) had become dilapidated and I rebuilt it from top to bottom.
Witness Silim-Aššur, scribe.
From Nergal-eṭir.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to his servant: "Who is your competitor?" — I am your competitor.
The king's word to the clergy of the household of the delegate of Babylon, to the master builders of Babylon, to the Babylonians, to the Assyrians: I am well; you can be glad.
If a planet comes close to Regulus: the crown prince will sit on the throne, and he will exercise the kingship for many years; the throne will be stable; the great gods will give you confidence; you will conquer the enemies of the land; the gods will make the temples of the great gods happy.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
not ...
Witness Bel-...
Witness Kibinnî, confectioner. Witness Milqi-ilu.
Mitinti of the land Ashkelon rebelled against the treaty of the great gods and sided with me... Rahiānu, son of ... , sat on his throne and ... He did not do justice to ... He ... to his city, 150 ... cities ... Idi-Bīʾilu of the land Arubu ...
... brings
This is its interpretation.
and the ground beneath it is firm.
(As for) Necho (and) Šarru-lū-dāri, (and) Pān-Ḫarūa, the kings whom the god Aššur and the great gods, my lords, had named for shepherding the black-headed (people), who had abandoned the treaty of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, (and) had committed evil (deeds), (and) who had become hostile to Taharqa, they (the gods) made their hearts pound (and) their bodies tremble. They (the
If the moon is eclipsed in intercalary Adar (XII): the land will experience a severe winter, and the ruler will be humiliated.
Nabû-ušabši has sent a report on the palace to Kudurru. He has seized his two sons and 30 men in his hands and brought them to Babylon. The king should ask the men who ... with him ...
1 prayer bowl ditto;
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šar-ahhešu, who is (now) in Borsippa. Good health to the king, my lord! The king, my lord, can be glad indeed about my watch. Now then I am writing to the king, my lord, where the king, my lord, can rely.
Witness NN, chief of the master builders.
Ši-ibši, ... ;
Ninurta-ilaya,
This year let them give out seed corn ... and ...
at the disposal of Ereš-Issar,
10 ditto, hallam;
(As for) Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II), the king of the land Elam who had cast off the yoke of my lordship, he fled alone and took to the mountains. Tammarītu rebelled against him and cut down with the sword his forceful (military) campaign.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me:
... you should not fear
2 hectares of field in the town of Asihi; Atta'-idri, farmer, and his people;
In the top of the left surface of the 'finger' there is a 'weapon'-mark which faces the top of the 'finger.'
... I brought them into the presence of ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... ,
Witness Šulmu-ahhe, ditto.
Ulūlu (VI), the twenty-fifth day, eponymy of Sennacherib, king of the world.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
... I roofed them with beams of cedar. I fastened bands of bronze on doors of white cedar and I installed (them) in their gates.
... is complete
Witness Ṭab-šar-Nabû, scribe, keeper of the tablet.
... bread ...
... he ...
1 piece of ivory and 1 wooden box of figs;
Minu' ...
If a storm blows from the south: the harvest of sesame will not prosper.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments ...
If you should sin against Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, his brothers, ... , you shall pay ... and keep watch over them. If you should sin against them, you shall ... and die in their midst.
Witness Nergal-ahu-uṣur, commander-of-fifty of ...
Because ...
... the wall ...
3,000 stalks of vine.
the guard ...
... the king, my lord
... of the king ...
1 hectare — Ṣabutanu;
He trusted in my brothers, and abandoned the gods. He trusted in their good repute, and was confident. He did not fear the evil of the gods. He was confident in his heart, and did not fear my lordly majesty. He was confident in his heart and trusted in his own strength. He did not fear the command of the gods, and was not afraid of my royal majesty.
I shall finish the borders of all the lands.
... -ibni
... who dwells in his beautiful garden,
10 ditto, ... ;
... in the heart of the ram
They say: "We will not enter the Palace until we have been summoned." They are waiting for the king.
— This night the moon was surrounded by a halo, Cancer and Gemini stood in it.
Let them place ...
... I became afraid ...
5 sheep, 5 bowls (of wine): the queen.
... the third year, the gods ... , the god Adad will devastate ... of the enemy land ... will be destroyed ... the land Subartu.
... to Marduk-aplu-šumu
The king, my lord, should have mercy on his servant. I am not able to serve the people in full, and my heart is not entirely devoted to my lord.
The people of Egypt have not come out to do work for me, saying: "We are your men."
... who sits on the throne, Azaiaš, and all the ... who sit on his knees, and who have prayed to Ursâ, the Urarṭian, ...
And the king should give orders that they should come to us ... of the king, and that they should not set out without us.
... the forts of the Urarṭian which are on the border, have attacked his troops and brought them up to the forts.
The city Malakitu has been destroyed. When the day arrived, I set out against the ... s and the cities. The people and oxen were brought out, and they were counted. Those who were brought out were counted in Der.
Palace of Aššur-nādin-apli, king ...
Palace of Aššur-bēl-kala, king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, son of Tiglath-pileser (I) (who was) also king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (I) (who was) also king of the universe (and) strong king, king of Assyria:
adjoining the field of NN,
I received ... from Kibaba of Harhar. I received horses and mules.
I sent him ...
Witness Ninuayu, ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
Total 19 gods of the house of God.
Witness Abunu.
a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
For his life and the well-being of his city he built the temple of the goddess Ištar of the city Ashdod.
NN, royal bodyguard;
Concerning the emissaries of Bit-Kapsi
From Nabû-šuma-iškun.
Total, from the house of Ibâ.
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
Witness Mullissu-kabtir.
On my return march, I defeated all together the Tuʾumuna, Riḫiḫu, Yadaqqu, Ubudu, Gibrê, Maliḫu, Gurumu, Ubulu, Damunu, Gambulu, Ḫindaru, Ruʾuʾa, Puqudu, Ḫamrānu, Ḫagarānu, Nabatu, (and) Liʾtaʾu, insubmissive Arameans. I carried off into Assyria a substantial booty (consisting of
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-šumu-ukin. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May the gods ... the good health of ... who ...
... Aššur-šumu-iddina
I opened your ears and I listened to your prayers. I took the oath of your lords and kissed their feet.
Shalmaneser, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil and vice-regent of the god Aššur: he built the Tabira Gate, together with its doors, for the processional way of the city of Aššur.
... wrote to me
If the Pleiades enter the moon and come out to the north: Akkad will become happy; the king of Akkad will become strong and have no rival.
and the message ...
Witness Adallal, ...
Šamšī-Adad, strong king, king of the universe, unrivalled king, king of all lands, the one who fashioned image(s) of the gods, the one who built Eḫursagkurkurra, the one who renovated the sanctuaries of the gods, the one who (re)confirmed the regular offerings of the temples, the one who (re)established the privileged status of the lands, the one who (re)confirmed the exemption of Ekur, the temple of the god Sîn, the one who (
5 minas of silver, 5 togas, 5 tunics, 1 pot of (mixed) fruit, 100 pomegranates, all tribute: the queen;
You shall not sin against this treaty tablet, nor make common cause with any other one who sins against this treaty tablet, nor make common cause with any other one who sins against Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, nor swear an oath by the treaty of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, concerning Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, nor swear an oath by the treaty of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, concerning any other person, nor make common cause with any other person, nor swear an o
Tablet of Sagab, including the letter of Nabû-šar-ahhešu, which he sent to him for six years.
1 talent in the heavy sort ... for 2 ...
Total 6 witnesses from Bit-Eriba-ila'i.
Total, 30 minas of silver ... , instead of the silver ...
I have brought the letter from the governor of the Medes with me, and am herewith sending my messenger to the Palace.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-šar-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord!
a ... and ...
... he will die.
... until I hear the report of my messenger.
... they have gone
6, the rest ...
The people are ...
The money is paid completely. That field is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The whole temple is finished. All the gods of the king are well.
The sign which the king ...
If the king, my lord, commands, let them bring them down and do as the king, my lord, commands.
... the stool
... Bel-sama' ...
... the land ...
The 'cavity' of the left lung is split...
He shall pay the silver in its original amount on the 30th of Tishri (VII). If he does not pay, it shall increase by 4 shekels of silver per month.
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-alik-pani. Good health to the king, my lord!
(As for) the foundation of the throne of my priestly office, which had become old and dilapidated, in the course of a renovation I removed its dilapidated parts. I inspected its ancient tablets and read (them) carefully. I made a new copy of (their) original wording and wrote (it) upon (them).
2 cuts of shoulder, of 1 ox: the stomach, the liver,
Month Iyyar (II), 15th day, eponym year of Kanunayu of Dur-Šarruken.
... s of Nabû-ahhe-... , chief ...
Sennacherib, ... the creation of ... , with ...
The breast-bone is thick.
Šakiru, servant of Ahabû —
... from the day that ...
... I marched to the land Lulume. I conquered the cities Maqqu, Andarīa, ... , ... , (and) Adauš, which are at the foot of these mountains. I crossed the Zab River. I conquered the extensive land Lulume and the land Adauš. I added (those lands) to my dominion. I exercised authority over them forever.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
3 haunches, 6 rib cuts;
Witness Šarru-lu-dari.
In a one-half mile stretch, I bonded together with bitumen four large limestone (blocks) and spread marsh reeds and rushes over them. I added 500 ... (and) 280 large doors to the former palace and I made (them) 914 large cubits long and 480 large cubits wide. I raised its superstructure 190 courses of brick high.
in the city ...
shall place 10 minas of silver (and) one mina of gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Total: 2 horses, 5 chariots, 50 shield-spearmen, 50 bowmen, total 100 men ... , 5 horses ... Nabû-ahu-iddina ...
with the land ...
Witness NN, scribe of the crown prince.
For the goddess Gula, for the goddess Gula-kitti, for the god Sîn of heaven, for the god Adad of heaven, for the god Šamaš of heaven, for the goddess Ištar of heaven, for the god Ninurta of the twin stars, for the god Ninurta of the tabriu, for the god Nergal of the twin stars, for the god Nergal of the tabriu, for the goddess Nanāya:
If ... in the path of the Enlil stars ... the land of Akkad will become happy; the king of Akkad will become strong and have no rival.
... me
1 ... 12 oxen of gold;
The moon will complete the day at its appearance.
(As for) the one who destroys an inscribed object bearing my name and the name of my father, by some crafty device he will make (it) disappear. May the great gods of heaven and netherworld overthrow his sovereignty (and) destroy his name (and) his seed from the land.
... to the šandabakku
seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Remanni-Adad, his sons and grandsons, shall place x minas of silver (and) one mina of gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owner.
2 minas of silver, paid in full.
... why ...
of the fort ...
17 hectares of sown land;
Witness Qarhâ, ditto.
I carried off the people of the city Akkuddu, insubmissive Arameans, on baskets (and) carts, (and) I brought (them) to Assyria. I added (them) to my numerous troops that (the god) Aššur had given to me.
livers, kidneys, hearts;
... we will put before Belet-ili ...
With my personal bodyguard and the troops who had not been mixed together, I took the direct road ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Ninurta-le'i. Good health to the king, my lord!
I brought out Padî, their king, from the city Jerusalem and placed (him) on the lordly throne over them, and (then) I imposed upon him payment (in recognition) of my overlordship.
(As for) Akkuddu of the city Šinuḫtu, who had trusted in Mitâ, the king of the land Musku, and had not bowed down to my yoke, I captured him alive with his family, his chariots, ... his daughters, ...
The god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises.
... returned ...
... ;
... camp
Aššur-rēša-iši, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, whom the gods Anu, Enlil, and the great gods named for shepherding the land of Assyria and the protection of its sanctuaries, the one who loves the gods of heaven and underworld, the one who reveres the prince, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of the goddess Ištar, the one who reveres the great gods, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of
... ;
The women go to Nineveh and ...
... you have ...
Witness Erṣiṣi.
... not ...
Witness Bahî.
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, and (then) I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, fortified cities, together with the small(er) settlements in their environs (and) the district of the land Bīt-Barrû in its entirety, and I added (
When the king enters the palace, Šarrat-nipha sits in the akitu chapel. They bring the bulls and sheep of the house of Dagan before the king in the courtyard of the palace. Aššur sits on his seat.
— Saturn stands in the halo of the moon.
If a planet is red: plenty for the people.
If Nergal in his appearance is bright and his features are radiant: the stars of the sky will come close to each other and will be bright; the cattle of Akkad will lie in the steppe undisturbed; the harvest of Akkad will prosper; in the steppe, sesame and dates will prosper; the gods will remember Akkad favorably.
... red, rear part;
Mercury is going to drop.
The vertebrae are recessed. The 'cavity' of the ... lung is split...
... his favourable omens. The gods Ea, Šamaš, Asalluḫi, Šerua, Attu, and Adad, the father of all waters, who created all rivers, together with their entirety, are doing very well. The king, my lord, can be very glad.
or ...
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
The king, my lord, who is the provider for this garden and the orchard, who has made the weapons of Aššur and Mullissu prevail over the throne, and who has performed a sheep offering and a sacrifice for 1,000 (people),
Witness ... la...
The land of Dagunu ... ; the king, my lord, wrote
to not to be darkened ...
So that the foundation of the terrace might be secure, I made its base as firm as a mountain. I had the gods Šamaš and Šamaš, with their radiant splendor, look steadfastly upon them. I made the foundation of the terrace as secure as a mountain. I had the gods, the judges of the netherworld, the judges of the underworld, the judges of the netherworld, the judges of the underworld, my helpers, take up residence on (their) eternal dais(es).
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nammir. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
In the month Šer'i-mêši, the day of the opening of the vat, I laid the foundation of the palace that is on the right side, which is (called) “The Palace of the Widow.” I had (it) built anew for my royal residence.
Esarhaddon, fearless king of Assyria, the one who reveres the gods, the one who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the gods, am I —
and ...
This night, on the 5th day, the king ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Balasî. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Witness Nabû-eriba, deputy.
Witness Aya-adad, chariot driver.
4 ...
The front, outer cuts;
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Itti-Adad-anenu.
I shall go to the city of Sarugi and cultivate the cornfield there. Later on, I shall go to the city of Gudunu and cultivate the cornfield there.
Seal of Adad-ahu-iddina, owner of the people being sold.
News of the house of Dala-beli-iddina: he is staying in ... , guarding him.
I have sent ...
... "
A tablet of Urzana to the palace herald. Good health to you!
... to his offspring ... he brought to a standstill ... he made ...
... Mannu-ki-...
The city Tīda ... I laid waste to its meadowlands, which ... I burned with fire. I did not spare a single one of the palace. I leveled it from top to bottom. I filled the plain with the debris of the ruined city.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let the prelate of ... of the town of Meštu come and speak with them ... " — he has not come, and they are still talking with him. He says: "I will go and ... " Let him come and speak with him.
Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, has contracted and bought them from Mannu-ki-Ninua for 17 1/2 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish from Sin-šumu-...
I plundered the land Bīt-Amukāni and carried off its people to Assyria. I captured alive Mukin-zeri, their king, in the city Sapia, a city of his.
... of my lord
From this very fact, the king my lord can be confident that his servant and his house are loyal to him.
From there I went to the town ... lia in the district of the fortresses of Aššur-belu-taqqin. I burnt the house of the people who had not brought the barley, and I seized the men therein.
Isana
May a later prince, whom Aššur names for shepherding the land and people, read aloud this inscription written in my name, anoint (it) with oil, make an offering, (and) place (it) with his (own) inscribed object. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
... the king, my lord
If the star of Assyria is bright: the path of the sun will be straight ...
If Venus becomes visible in Sivan (III): the enemy will take the land.
Total 7, of Adad-...
Total 6 women.
... I have seen
of the king from the country ...
... you did not guard me ...
Witness Ubru-... , mayor of Que.
to ...
... came
The officiant throws a cup of water and a cup of beer into the river. He throws in a purification device, and says: “Ištar, accept life!” He throws ... into the House of the Aššur Goddess, and says: “Ištar, accept life!” He throws in a purification device, and says: “Ištar, accept life!”
I laid its foundations on top of (its) original foundation(s). I built (and) completed (it) from its foundations to its crenellations. I deposited my monumental inscription. May Aššur, my lord, look with pleasure upon it.
... fish
The gall bladder is overturned and faces the gall bladder...
NN and his people, Mutaqqin-Sin and his people, NN and his people,
This is a ... of the king, my lord. This is the tree that he wrote to the king, my lord. It is written in the king's word.
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial audience gift from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
... jar of wine ...
Good health to my brother! May Aššur and Ešarra bless my brother!
... s ...
Perhaps the prefect of Babylon will write to the king, my lord, that the citizens of Babylon are being deported to the land of Bani. They have been deported because of the prefects' order that they should bring the chariots and the silver to the citizens of Babylon, Borsippa and Cutha. The citizens of Babylon are not able to bring the chariots and silver. They have been deported because they have been deported. When the prefect has arrested the men from among them, he has said: "I have arrested my messengers and sent them
... is not ...
... ;
... s against the Urarṭian, who had fled from the land Urarṭu to the land Šubria, and whom Ursâ, king of Urarṭu, had sent against them, but who had not feared his words, and who had plotted evil (deeds) against him — I, with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, captured his people and plundered them. I asked the people of the land Urarṭu about the deeds of the great gods concerning their people, and they informed me. I ... the fugitives of the land Ur
... Let the king, my lord, ask him what he said to the king, my lord. The servants of the king are saying: "The king should return and take care of the business of the king, my lord. I am not able to do it." Let one of the exorcists or physicians appoint me to my position. Let them do the work together.
If the Scales' position is stable: there will be truth in the land.
who ... his staff
I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire the fortresses that Baʾalu, the king of the land Tyre, had built against me. I received from him his substantial payment, (and) brought (it) to Assyria.
Witness Usiî, cohort commander.
... my forces ...
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "How many bull colossi have you made?" — they have made 10 ... and 10 ...
10 ditto, hallam;
Witness Šep-Aššur, ...
Now they are on their way to the king, my lord.
Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, who is now ill, and on whom the 'hand' of your great divinity is being 'imposed' in extispicy —
2 talents, the fuller of the cloaks;
... ;
(As for) Baʾalu, the king of the land Tyre who did not honor my royal command(s), he made fortresses against me. In the midst of the sea and swamps, he seized (them) and turned (them) over to me.
Witness Uqur-ahhe.
When the messenger came to ... , he said to me: "Their property, their field, and the Elamite property of Ha'iri ... have been taken away from them. Write to the king, our lord, whatever news there is. The king, our lord, will hear it and become happy. Write to me what the news is."
I marched to the city Madaktu, his royal city. In the month Tebet (X), bitter cold set in and snow fell, so that the ground was covered with snow and ice. I pitched camp in a bend of the river (lit. “between rivers”) like a crane and spent the night.
As to the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let them be brought here!" — let the bull colossi be brought here.
... the work ...
Witness Uburuqu.
The word of the god Marduk to the seven (sons of) the goddess Zarpanītu: Do not forget the good deeds that you did for me, O Aššur! Do not sin against this treaty of the great gods, (for) Assurbanipal, the beloved of the god Enlil, is the one who has remembered you.
As long as he lives, he shall not change (his mind).
... the Urarṭian
After they had made them, I inspected them. I did not ... my father. I inspected Šamaš-šumu-ukin, the one who had been appointed to the kingship of Karduniaš (Babylonia), Šamaš-šumu-ukin, my brother, the one who had been appointed to the kingship of Sumer (and) Akkad, Aššur-mukin-paleya, my brother, the one who had been appointed to the kingship of the Sealand, Aššur-etel-šam
... he will finish the garments
The gods Aššur, Šērūa, Eḫursaggalkurkurra, Anu, Enlil, Ea, and Belet-ili, the great gods, the Igīgū gods, the Anunnakū gods, the gods who dwell in the underworld, the Anunnakū gods, the gods who dwell in the netherworld, the gods who dwell in the apsû, the gods who dwell in the underworld, the gods who dwell in the netherworld, the gods who dwell in the apsû, the gods who dwell in
... the king of Elam ...
Does your great divinity know it? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Disregard the (formulation) of the prayer for today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-belu-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! The city of Der and the fort are well.
He is ...
Total, ...
The salt and cress which you provide are ...
... who loves him, goes to the river ordeal, and enters the reed hut, and who is placed over the river ordeal,
... inspected
I destroyed that district (and) turned (it) into ruins. With the support of the great gods, I defeated my enemies (and) took prisoners. I brought (them) to Nineveh.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Witness Nabû-abu-uṣur, ...
Witness Silim-ili.
Samaria, ...
... in the side of ...
NN, donkey driver;
... of the city Kulluḫu
... the 'hand' of god ...
... their words ...
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, unrivalled king of all princes, favorite of the great gods, guardian of truth who loves justice, renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the insubmissive, (and) the one who strikes enemies with lightning:
... I will not change. If ... who is not present, I will explain
(As for) the rest of the Arabs who had fled from my weapons, Erra, the warrior, killed them with the sword. He hung their corpses on poles and placed (them) around their (own) necks. He paraded through the streets of the cities Nineveh (and) Arbela, the cities of the great gods, my lords.
Ditto by Sin, Šamaš, Adad and Marduk!
He said: "We will not go until we have been told." On the 10th of Ab (V) we will go and bring the carts. As soon as the 10th is over, we shall go and bring the ... carts too. If the 20th is all right, we shall go and bring the ... carts too."
If a planet becomes visible in ... : rain and flood will last long.
240 bows,
20 minas of black wool;
... and did not speak with us. If the king so orders,
Witness ... birtu.
1 seah 1 'litre' of regular offering loaves;
And let the king send a royal eunuch to ... , so he can appoint him to the position ...
I hitched up teams of horses that were trained to the yoke in the mighty highlands, and had (them) pull (them) along a road that was very difficult (and) very rugged. I traveled two leagues (and) marched on.
4 ... ;
... of Bit-Hamban ... the city Yakīn ... they will kill, plunder, loot ...
The king, my lord, knows that the tower of Marduk-šakin-šumi
The charge of the 'Lady of Cults' is doing very well; the king, my lord, can be very glad indeed.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have seen fear and terror at night, or jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
a ditto of small onions;
... his fathers
And as to what my lord said: "The gods have become angry" — will they ... ?
To the king, my lord: your servant Na'di-ilu. Good health to the king, my lord!
We kept watch on the 29th day; we did not see the moon. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king my lord!
... cavalry ...
5 ditto — Il-hari
I myself prayed to the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl, Nabû, Nergal, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela, the gods who support me, (and) I made a vow to them. They immediately heeded my prayers (and) came to my aid.
... against the word of the king ... I ... my brothers ... and ...
If on the 14th day the moon and sun are seen together: reliable speech; the land will become happy; the gods will remember Akkad favorably.
Twelve thousand brave men from the land of the Mušku, who do not fear death, who are skilled in battle, who have no equal in the assembly of princes, who march at the side of the god Nabû, the exalted lord, and who have no rival among the princes of the land of Sumer and Akkad —
... his ... s to the banquet
That silver is paid completely.
... have been given to me.
... the army ...
Witness Busi-ilani, ditto.
Ever since the people of the city Ḫame ... went out and settled in my presence, I have been going back and forth to Borsippa ...
And they are telling me the words of the heart of Akkad. All of them are telling it to me before Šamaš.
Now then, let them come to Maumaya, and let a royal messenger come to Maumaya.
1 goose, 1 duck, 10 turtledoves.
To the king, my lord: your servant Akkullanu. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
From Nabû-šuma-iškun.
Palace of Sîn-šarra-iškun.
Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
I destroyed (and) devastated his cities, (and) turned (them) into ruins by the command of the god Gīra.
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, the one who built the temple of the god Aššur, the one who (re)constructed Esagil and Babylon, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, descendant of Sennacherib, king of the world (and) king of Assyria.
From the throne of Bel-Harran as far as the fort of Adad-remanni from ... as far as Dur-Tukulti-Ninurta ... x leagues x stretches x rods from the throne of Bel-Harran as far as Dur-Tukulti-Ashur.
Witness Bel-...
I detained him
After Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, has gone to his fate, Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, will ascend the royal throne. He will be king and lord of Assyria over you. You will not make common cause with him, nor will you make common cause with anyone else against him. You will not plot evil against him, nor will you make common cause with anyone else against him.
The god Aššur, the great lord, ... the god Anu, king of the Igīgū and Anunnakū gods, lord of the lands, the god Abu, ... , the one who makes the insubmissive submit ... , the god Ea, king of the apsû, ... , the one who decrees destinies, ... , who makes my kingship ... , ... , ...
Whoever erases my inscribed name and writes his (own) name, or changes the position of this stele and places (it) in another place, or throws (it) into water or fire, or buries (it) in the ground, may the goddess Ištar, mistress of war and battle, not come to his aid. May she not listen to his prayers. May she not go to his aid in waging war against his enemy. May she make his weapons disappear. May she not perform the rites of the god Aššur, my lord, (and) may she not
From Nabû'a of Assur.
... Nergal-... , son of Ana-Nabû-taklak
Witness ... -ilu, eunuch.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Where are the rest of the troops?" My major-domo is delayed, but the rest of the troops are coming.
Nusku-duri, ... ; 2 women; a total of 3 people.
Nabû-ahu-uṣur, baker;
Total, 60 ...
The 'crucible' is present. The 'crucible' is curled, and turns towards the king and the man Kalu-šumu-ukin. It keeps turning and going back and forth.
In the left side of the lung there is a 'foot'-mark. The top of the 'finger' is split...
... is split.
Witness Zarutî, physician.
Witness Ahu-illika, servant of the chief eunuch.
a reed basket ...
Let the king ask the bearer of the sign about whom my lord asked. He has fallen into the river. I have dressed him and sent him off.
Sukkaya;
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
The day before yesterday ... the prelate ... his messenger came to the king of Babylon. In Nisan (I) the prelate ... came to him. He killed an ox in his presence. He said: "Let me write to the king, my lord, that the seal of the prelate of Babylon which is in the sealed message which Esarhaddon sent to you, is worth one talent and twenty minas of gold and one talent of red wool." He gave the sealed message to the king of Babylon.
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of the deities Aššur, Šerua, (and) Ištar of Bīt-Kidmuri, the one who fashioned image(s) of the deities Bēlet-ilī, Kubu, Ḫaya, Kusu, Nusku, (and) Ea, and the great gods:
stomachs, livers, kidneys, hearts.
The king, my lord, can be glad indeed.
In two chariots, care of Aššur-ahhe-eriba.
The Itu'eans who were appointed to the woodcutter's post in the fort have returned this favour to the bodyguard. They are telling it to the king, my lord.
... my messenger
Concerning Nabû-qati-ṣabat and Šamaš-... about whom the king, our lord, wrote to us: "...
To the king of the universe, my lord: your servant NN. May DNN bless the king, my lord, for many days.
This is from before Aššur.
Now let the king ask Arbayu. Let him give orders to his servant.
I made a golden chariot, the vehicle of the god Marduk, the pre-eminent one among the gods, my lords, and I presented (it) to the god Marduk, the king of the totality of heaven and netherworld, the one who overwhelms my enemies.
He shall have the usufruct of the field for three years and three fallow years.
7,000 barley rations according to the seah of 6 'litres' at my disposal.
Belonging to Haza-il, deputy of the house of the lady of the palace, of the crown prince, owner of the man being sold.
I have written to the king, my lord, the ... s that I have received.
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered 88 fortified cities, fortresses of Chaldea, together with 820 small(er) settlements in their environs.
10 shoots (of sesame);
The money is paid completely. That field, house, threshing floor and well are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
From Ašaredu.
Ahiqar and the servants of Šarrat-kidmuri have delivered him to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, knows that the king, my lord, has made peace with the gods of the king, my lord. Šarru-hattu-ipel, the bodyguard whom the king, my lord, sent, has returned the field of the gods of the king, my lord.
The king came out. He performed sheep offerings and burnt fat. He offered fat oxen and fat sheep on the censers. He poured honey and oil ...
10 tablets ... ,
20, Assyrian, hand of the cupbearer;
He shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall give his men back in full.
He performs a sheep offering, treats the fire, (and) goes (away).
Ubru-... , NN, Ahu-... , Se'-... , NN,
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who loves the god Aššur and the goddess Mullissu, the one who is assiduous towards their shrines, the one who is attentive to their command(s), the one who is assiduous towards their sanctuaries, the one who is attentive to their command(s), the one who is assiduous towards their sanctuaries, the one who is assiduous towards their sanctuaries, the one who is assiduous towards their sanctuaries, the one who
1, the village manager(s) of the towns, at the disposal of Zarutî, cohort commander.
Witness Nabû-ahhe-iddina, baker.
horse trainers of the open chariotry;
Now then the Šubrian emissary is coming to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, ask him what he has to say.
The god Ninurta, the foremost heir, the one who makes opposing forces agree, looked steadfastly upon me and made my heart greater than (those of) all of the gods of the city Ashur. He made the god Nabû, his lord, rise from his (text: “her”) dwelling and he placed in his (text: “her”) hands the whip that controls the insubmissive.
The forts ...
... thousand, near the city Uppumu
Witness Didî.
2 jerboas;
Month Iyyar (II), 26th day, eponym year of Gabbaru.
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the city ... tu, a royal city of the land Elam.
... who dwells in the underworld, does not fear the sword.
the governor of Calah ...
Qurdi-Ashur,
One ... servant of Bel-Harran-isse'a and Mannu-ki-...
Witness Puṭu-paiti.
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of Assyria, unrivalled king, pious shepherd who revere the great gods, guardian of truth who loves justice, renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the insubmissive, (and) the one who strikes enemies with lightning:
... I laid in the Gate of the Rising Sun. I deposited the clay cone.
The bread of the inner sanctum of the House of Aššur and of all the temples is the responsibility of the chief baker of the House of Aššur.
1 ditto of šubû-stone for 1.
Witness Mušezib-Aššur, ...
... they have been erased
... this ...
Witness Se'-ila'i, ditto.
Palace of Sargon (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, favorite of the great gods;
I have heard the report of my lord, and it is very good.
... and ...
... the king who subdued the land of the people of the Arabs and the land of the Hittites, and who placed (them) on the throne, with my battle troops, I took the lead, I marched about victoriously, I conquered the lands of the Hittites,
... Šumma-šarri, chariot fighter
With the support of Aššur, my lord, I advanced from the city Tūšḫu. I received a substantial payment from the chariots of the fortresses, the cavalry, the wagons, the (horse) trainers, the (team) commanders, the (king) of the city Piturra, the fortress of their city Dērāya, the city Marṣiš, (and) the twenty-two fortresses which were without walls. I mustered my numerous troops and forces, (and) took the direct road against them.
... to Nisan (I)
... the chariot driver of the palace
The chief eunuch and the magnates have not yet returned from the audience with the king. They are bringing the feet of the king and the mules, and are staying overnight on your throne.
... for the preservation of his life. May my lord ... to Nergal and Laṣ for the life of the man who built this temple. May he establish a good name for the man who built this temple before the king.
... them
... men and their property
You shall not plot evil, malicious, or rebellious things against Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, nor make common cause with his enemy, nor with his uncles, nor with his brothers, nor with his cousins, nor with his prefects, nor with the rab-mūgi, nor with the emissaries of the land of the Qutu, nor with the emissaries of the land of the Šubaru, nor with any other enemy, nor with any other unfaith
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me:
... Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, will return the money tenfold to its owner.
1 gold ring, 15 1/3 shekels, 1 gold seal, 32 1/3 shekels, Ahu-duri, son of NN.
... I ...
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments ...
Witness Akkudanu.
Šarri-nuri, farmer, 6 persons; Milki-nuri, farmer, x persons; ... -Issar, farmer, 2 persons; ... ;
Month Adar (XII), 12th day.
... he killed ...
... is good. He said: "...
Whatever my brother says, send (word)!
... and let them be taken out and put in their house. Whoever ... , whether ... , should ask him ...
in this city ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šarru-emuranni. Good health to the king, my lord!
From Nergal-eṭir.
... until now
4 females donkey-mares, for 32 shekels.
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
I am herewith sending to the king, my lord, one who has been made to be a liar.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Balaṭu-ereš or his sons or grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Mušallim-Issar,
Month Iyyar (II), 28th day, eponym year of Aššur-naṣir.
3 overcoats, the front red, ... ;
Witness Inurta-isse'a.
Thirty turtledoves.
... front
The seed of the land ... will be brought back ... Sin and Nikkal ...
... the city ...
... the xth day;
I had mercy on him and spared his life. I had mercy on him and spared his life.
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract, whether Babilayu or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or his prefect or his neighbour, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against the woman of Borsippa,
This month is the beginning of the year. Let the king come and take the road. Let them perform the sacrifices and ...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the 4th day of this month, the month ... , to the 11th day of Sivan (III)
He sent his son to the house of Ibnâ, son of Nur-Sin, but he did not marry.
This is its interpretation.
... very
Šumma-ilani has contracted and bought it for x minas of silver.
Cloaks ...
NN, bodyguard of the queen mother;
... as follows
who ... with the support of ...
The goddess Ningal, the great lady, ... in the assembly of the great gods ...
Witness Nabû-ballissu, baker.
Let the king send a scribe to Balṭi-Issar, and let him be appointed over ... ; he should be the one who leads us.
Witness Kablu-Issar, rab sikkāti.
Total, of Aremu-Nabû-naši.
The coils of the colon are 14 in number...
... not ...
... or the ...
Naṣiru is the one who is to blame for the destruction of the cedar forest. He is the one who has cut down the tree that was the life of the land. He is the one who has cut down the tree of Akkad.
Month Tishri (VII), 8th day, eponym year of Bel-Harran-shadua.
To the king, my lord: your servant PN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Bel and Nabû bless the king, my lord!
The gate of ...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the ... th day of this month, the month ... of this year, to the 23rd day of Marchesvan (VIII) of this year, for ... days and nights, my stipulated term,
Aššur-nārārī, king of the universe, son of Aššur-dān (I) (who was) also king of the universe, son of Aššur-bēl-kala (I) (who was) also king of the universe:
Isî, the woman Atar-... , his wife, Banî, his son of 5 spans' height, Daiyanu, his son of x spans' height, Ramâ, his daughter, a total of 5 people —
NN, farmer, and his people.
Marduk-šumu-uṣur, Naṣiru, Tabnî, ...
The son of Nikkal-iddin has written to the king of Elam and to Humbanigaš, saying: "... the king of Assyria and the camp ...
... their prefects
Abi-ila'i,
... to
I exercised authority over the land Ḫatti (Syria-Palestine) ... I imposed tribute and payment on the chieftains of Chaldea.
Now then I am sending you to Dur-Šarruken. You will ... the bull colossi on your ... as ... as ...
... Nabû-na'id, king of Babylon, strong king, king of the universe, son of Nabû-balāssu-iqbi, king of Babylon, king of the universe, son of Nabû-balāssu-iqbi (I), king of Babylon, king of the universe.
I will ... , and I will ...
As to the news of Belšunu, the Bit-Dakkurians about whom the king, my lord, wrote, I have sent a messenger to him, but he has not yet returned to his side. As soon as he returns, I shall write again.
Concerning the troops about whom the king, my lord, wrote to his servant: "For how many days should they stay (here)?" —
If the moon becomes visible in Tebet (X) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour Subartu; a foreigner will rule the Westland.
... with Urda-...
He places a rib on the brazier, burns juniper and cedar,
At that time, I had the bank of the Euphrates and the entirety of its meadowland, which had become overgrown with reeds, cleared. I had a canal dug straight through it from the bank of the Euphrates to the plain. I made (it) as bright as day.
... you fear ...
... days
2 talents of linen;
4 minas of silver belonging to Šamaš-ila'i, which he gave to Sailu and Sailu and to Šamaš-ila'i.
If a fog rolls in Shebat (XI): eclipse of the Westland.
Seal of Šamaš-ku... ,
That which is written upon it is not written correctly. The water is not drawn out. The dam ...
A writing-board ...
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract, whether Nabû-eriba or the governor or the deputy, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation, shall pay 12 minas of silver.
Marduk-...
1, overseer(s) of the streets;
Concerning what the king wrote to us: "When you have finished building the house, finish the rest of the work and do it in the same way" — let them finish the rest of the work in the same way.
In the future may a later prince, when that ... becomes dilapidated, restore it. May he write my name with his name (and) return it to the kings, my descendants.
You are a hero, a warrior, one who loves justice,
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me, ...
On my second campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me so that I mustered my numerous troops (and) ordered the march to the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians, who since time immemorial had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors. In the high mountains, difficult terrain, I rode on horseback and had my personal chariot carried on (men’s) necks. In very rugged terrain I roamed about on foot like a wild bull.
king of the world, ... ,
I put to the sword the population of the city Ḫirimmu, a dangerous enemy who since time immemorial had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors, and I did not leave one alive. I reorganized that district (and) imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the gods of Assyria, my lords.
who in my presence ...
I have been wronged. May I come to life with the king! May I see the king's face, and may I be confident!
Witness Barruqu, ditto.
and ...
... he
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
... have returned
... he is a carpenter. He is with the king.
An estate of 40 hectares of sown land
17th day, eponym year of Ṣalmu-šarri-iqbi.
8 females, of 5 spans' height;
I have ... ed the seed corn
I am a servant of the king. If it is acceptable to
Šumma-Adad, ...
8 (cuts of) meat, the house of ... i;
Witness Sukkaya.
... the king, my lord, ...
Witness Aššur-šumu-uṣur.
... I conquered the land Nalḫu and (then) I destroyed the city ... -Aššur, (and) carried off the people of the lands that I had conquered. I annexed to Assyria the lands Sardurri, Lusia, (and) Sūbādi, together with the city Bīt-Zūʾa, fortresses of the land Urarṭu, (and) the cities in their environs.
I received ...
If the front of the gall bladder is red and its left side is white: the king will conquer a land not his own.
... of your house, NN
Why does the daughter of Bambâ ... ?
The city Akkad with ...
... all ...
An estate of Nur-Dananu, chariot driver, at the disposal of Sa'ilâ, his son.
The master of the banquet should not go down to the river ... ; ... should be finished ...
Moreover, I made the cedar roof-beams that I had cut from the cedar forest into doors for my palace. I had doors of boxwood inlaid with mountings of shining silver, which were fastened with bands of shining silver, installed in their gates.
Why does the king, our lord, say: "... seized ...
From Balasî.
Seal of Bel-tarṣi-ilumma, eunuch of Adad-nārārī, king of the universe, governor of the city Kalḫu, land Ḫamath, land Tēl-mani, (and) land Yaluna, son of Bēl-tarṣi-ilumma, (who was) also eunuch of Adad-nārārī, king of the universe.
Ebabbarra, “House of the fates”: the house of Gula, the house of the cupbearer.
x cans of beer;
... Now, as the king, my lord, commanded, "You are to release ... " — I am releasing them. Let them ... to the king, my lord. The moon, my lord, should be confident. If it is acceptable to the king, my lord, let them release the ... s who are to be released. Your gods will not be in my hands.
May the gods who dwell in Arbela bless the king, my lord.
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, capable shepherd, circumspect ruler, (and) leader of a widespread population, I:
10 ditto, ... ;
The king of Babylon and the king of the land Elam saw the dust cloud of my expeditionary force, then they abandoned their chariots and fled alone.
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhe.
... of the daughter ...
Adad-nerari (III), overseer, son of Šamši-Adad (V), overseer, son of Shalmaneser (III), likewise overseer.
You, O Aššur, do not love his offspring, his daughter, his wife, his family, his seed, his progeny, his offspring, his descendants, his relatives, his people, the people of Akkad, the land of Sumer and Akkad, you have cast off their yoke, you have cut off their bonding-band, you have cut off their yoke-rope, you have cut off their yoke-rope, their shepherdship, their herdsmanship, their leadership, their dominion, and you have cast them into
... the 'path' ...
Witness Idduya, priest of Ninurta.
Palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of the universe, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of the universe: property of the palace of the king of the lands.
... and if ...
When they were taken prisoners and brought to the king, our lord, ...
... you will die.
15 minas, 1/2 ... ;
The kettledrums which are being brought to the king, my lord, are the regular offerings of the king. They are received and presented to the king, my lord, every day.
Ninurta-duru-usur,
Now then ... you have stationed guards in all his paths, and all his roads are blocked. He has been cut off from his road and has to take a road that is not his road. He has been cut off from the road that leads to Bab-muṣi and has been made to take a road that is not his road. He has been cut off from all his roads.
An estate of x hectares of land
By Aššur, I am ...
If the moon at its appearance ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... of ivory
Witness Zar-Issar.
in accordance with the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord, and your favorable decisions, should Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, strive and plan? Should he send NN and ... to the cities of ... ? Is it pleasing to your great divinity?
To the king, my lord: your servant Inurta-belu-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord!
... the king, who is the great lord, the god Marduk, has greatly blessed me.
Witness Silim-Aššur, grand vizier.
to your ...
... pomegranate ...
Month Iyyar (II), 5th day, eponym year of NN.
... the rear of the house of Ilu-ahu-uṣur
Witness Nabû-rehtu-uṣur, cohort commander.
1, Tutî, village manager;
12 8 20 — ...
Witness Inurta-zeru-uṣur, scribe.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nadin-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk greatly bless the king, my lord!
Palace of Adad-nārārī, king of the universe, son of Arik-dīn-ili, king of Assyria: (brick) belonging to the terrace.
2 black horses,
The forts, temples and ... are well.
He shall pay one mina of silver.
... the day before yesterday ...
Seal of Se'-zabadi, owner of the woman being sold.
The gate opposite Aššur is the King’s Gate. The gate opposite its ziggurrat is the Gate of the Path of the Enlil-Stars. The gate is its ziggurrat. The 20th is the rest.
The king, my lord, should ask the (members) of the city council of Šabirešu whether I have not been coming to the feet of my chariot-driver, nor have I been coming to the feet of my chariot-driver's chariot-driver.
Month Iyyar (II), 24th day, eponym year of Nabû-šar-ahhešu, governor of Samaria.
... Ariye ...
x hectares of field in the town of ... , 150 hectares of field in the village of Qanâ-il, ... ,
6 minas, 2 bowls ... for bowls not ... ;
From Adad-šumu-uṣur.
... governors
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ra'im-nišešu. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king!
I captured the city Aššur-iddina by means of a tunnel.
... are full to the brim.
... -aplu-iddina, 2 persons; Urda-Nabû, 2 persons; Nabû-šabši, 7 persons;
2 ... ;
Whoever alters this tablet, or changes or erases this tablet, ... this treaty, or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... , or ... ,
... his ...
"I will speak up, I will not be silent!"
... the storehouse
The 20th day: let him kill a snake, he will reach the highest rank.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
7 homers 7 homers — (governor of) Habarnu.
84 83 82 ... 35 from the inner precinct ...
If the moon and sun are in balance: reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the world will make his throne last long.
... s of the fort
When they have finished, they shall go and bring them to the city Ammû, and shall bring them into the city Bubuna and settle them there.
A bag of ... , a bowl of ... , a priest of Šarrat-nipha, a priest of the bēt ēqi, ...
Month Tebet (X), 25th day, eponym year of Mannu-ki-Adad.
they came, said to me:
... , ... huru ditto, Dari-Bel ditto, NN ... ,
... the land of the Qumānu as far as the land Minuḫu, the city Ḫunusâ ... I returned and ... I decorated them with precious stones... I made the great city, their royal city, beautiful... I returned to my city Aššur... I made ... to be their ... and ... I made their ... and their ... abundant. I brought 2,000 captives from the land of the Qumānu ... I settled them in my land.
The king, my lord, will catch ...
I had foundation inscriptions made of silver, gold, bronze, lapis lazuli, alabaster, basalt, (and) antimony, (and) I wrote on them the praise of my heroism (and) the deeds that I had done. I erected (these inscriptions) in their (the palatial halls’) doorjamb(s) for ever after.
Ariyate
Concerning the escape of the Assyrian, Bel-iqiša, a citizen of Assyria, to the enemy, may the god Aššur, king of the gods, not show you mercy and compassion! May he not intercede for you before the god Aššur, your lord, and may he not return you to your position! May he not speak favorable things about you before the god Aššur! May he not return the land of the king, my lord, to its place! May he not return the Assyrians, your servants, to their positions
Bel-emuranni,
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Eltekeh (and) Tamnâ. I approached the city Ekron and I killed the governors (and) nobles who had committed crime(s) and hung their corpses on towers around the city; I counted the citizens who had committed the criminal acts as booty; (and) I commanded that the rest of them, (those) who were not guilty of crimes or wrongdoing, (to) whom no penalty was due, be allowed to go free.
If a planet ... becomes visible: rain and flood ...
Witness Šulmu-ahhe, royal bodyguard.
6 shekels of silver, Bahianu, for Halleṣi, in exchange.
Total 11 ...
Witness Kenî.
May they make my omens favorable!
To the king, my lord: your servant Ululayu. The best of health to the king, my lord! Assyria is well, the temples are well, all the king's forts are well. The king, my lord, can be glad indeed.
... Assyria ...
... of Ašpa-bari
I shall send ...
... "
... to the place of battle ... Assurbanipal ... I made stand ... I ... him ... in Egypt ... I said: “Whoever removes the ... of Assurbanipal ... the ... of Aššur ... my feet ... to ...
5 mares:
I said to the deputy: "Give the rest of the ... to ... , and let the ... of Aššur-... the legate of Ki... appoint the deputy in ... "
... before Bel
Month Ab (V), 9th day.
The king will get angry with him, and his country will be destroyed.
Witness ... -ahhe.
The Hargean(s) ...
40 leagues by the (standard) of the sun, 60 leagues by the (standard) of the moon, of the sun, of Marduk, of the sun, of Nabû, in the sun, in its rising, in its setting, in the moon, in its rising, in its setting, in the path of the lion which ...
Witness Nabû-šumu-... , scribe, keeper of the contract.
... they should not hold back
... of
... Palṭi ditto, ...
... from the top ...
... Aššur-etel-šamê-erṣeti-muballissu
The gold which the treasurer, the palace scribe, and I gave them, three talents of pure gold, four talents of non-pure gold, they have taken to the treasury of the chief victualler. They have not given any gold for the image of the king, nor for the image of the queen mother. Let the king, my lord, give orders to the treasurer and the palace scribe that they should give the gold and that they should do the work.
The queen ... s the gods ...
total — the goddess Ištar of the Kidmuri temple.
If the moon is surrounded by a halo, and Regulus stands in it: in that year, women will give birth to male children.
The city Šummu-ḫimu.
Seal of Sasî, owner of the man being sold.
News of the Babylonians: ...
... my lords in their midst ... I made them enter inside and I made splendid ... I made splendid ... I made splendid ... I made splendid ... I made splendid ...
The Egyptians ...
From Munnabitu.
Ulūlu (VI), the tenth day, eponymy of Banbâ, the deputy minister (sukkallu šanû) (676 BC).
adjoining ...
In the pass of the Akkadians ...
Witness Ubru-Nabû, keeper of the contract.
I destroyed the land of Ḫumbanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš I), the Elamite, (and) I burned with fire the land Karalla, the land Šurda, the city Kišesim, the city Ḫarḫar, the land Media, (and) the land Ellipi. I made the god Aššur rise above all of the land Mannea (... ).
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû'a. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Asallu, Manzah, the Igigi gods of heaven, the Anunnaki gods of earth, the Twins, the Third and the Fourth, the Lords of the Underworld, the Anunnaki, the Weapons, the Dahiru, Adad, the rains, ... ,
Witness Hiriṣayu.
The lord of kings should stay two days in Šapanzipur. And ... in the steppe ...
... Esaggil, Babylon, and ...
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Zazaya.
Witness NN, ... of the chariot.
Now ...
If the moon is red at its appearance and its left horn is blunt, its right horn pointed: you will conquer a foreign land; Adad will devastate.
Instead of the interest he shall pay 15 shekels of silver.
(Property) of Šamaš-killanni, eunuch of the king.
Palace of Sennacherib, king of Assyria: (This is) the audience gift that Karib-il, king of the land Saba, presented to me. May (the gods) Šamaš, ... , Nabû, (and) Uraš make his name (and) his seed disappear.
... in Der
Ahi-yababa has contracted and bought it for x hundred copper shekels as a pledge from the captives of the vizier, on a boat. He has paid it in full to the deputy.
An estate of 1 hectare 2 decares adjoining ditto, adjoining Marduk-ereš;
We kept watch on the 29th day; we saw the moon. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king my lord!
in all 6: the 'residences' of ...
... the city Ḫatarikka, the city Ṣupba
At the beginning of my reign, I brought about the defeat of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), king of Karduniaš (Babylonia), together with the troops of (the land) Elam, in the plain of Kish. In the midst of that battle he abandoned his camp, fled alone, and (thereby) saved his life. I seized the chariots, wagons, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, and Bactrian camels that he had abandoned in the thick of battle.
to Ilu-šumu-iddina ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-metu-uballiṭ. The very best of health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk very greatly bless the king, my lord!
... there is a ... on them
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-belu-taqqin. Good health to the king, my lord!
4 minas of silver, 3 togas, 3 tunics: chief eunuch;
2 ...
... here
Now ...
... of the meal
Month Elul (VI), 20th day, eponym year of Dadi-metu.
in the future ...
... he did not have. The ... of the city ... was destroyed and burned. The ... of the city ... was destroyed and burned. The ziggurat ... which ... had been built ... he destroyed.
... the town of Šuma-... -ila'i
... ;
When he had finished, he said: "...
As to the spears about which the king, my lord, wrote to me, when I saw them, I prayed to Bel and Nabû, and placed them in a safe place. Now I am waiting for the king's further instructions.
... we shall send
... 20 hectares ...
... Assyria
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
On my second campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me so that I mustered my numerous troops and ordered the march to the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians, a dangerous enemy who since time immemorial had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors. In the high mountains, difficult terrain, I rode on horseback and had my personal chariot carried on (men’s) necks. In very rugged terrain I roamed about on foot like a wild bull.
Witness Ilu-šumu-ka''in, chariot fighter of the governor.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
... concerning ...
Witness Aššur-...
The queen will be very glad, she will come and enter the palace.
Lâbaši-lipušu is a competent scribe; he is useful to the king, my lord.
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial audience gift from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
... the canal
... they brought before me and kissed my feet. Twenty talents of gold, ... garments with multi-colored trim, eunuchs, male singers, female singers, ... horses of Egypt ... I received.
The king asked me: "What is it that you are doing?" I said: "What ... the gods are doing ... Gula of ... Gula of the steppe ...
4 litres of honey ...
Witness Silim-Aššur, horse trainer.
... ;
Let the king, my lord, send word that their prefects should come and stand guard with me until these logs arrive.
From Rašil the older, servant of the king.
Total, (of the) commander-in-chief of the right.
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... he gave to Bel ...
130 ...
Thus (speaks) the goddess Bēlet-balaṭi, the lady of warfare, the most valiant of the gods, the mother of the gods, the one who is most beloved by the god Aššur, the father who created her, the one who is most acceptable to him, the one who has received the scepter of kingship from her hands, the one who has grasped the holy whip of her lordship, the one who has received the holy insignia of her office, the one who has received the holy garment of her office, the one who has
When the king, my lord, asked his servant about the house, whether it is a house of straw or of anything, I stood up and bowed down before the king, my lord.
Month Adar (XII), 7th day, eponym year of Abi-ram, grand vizier.
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur.
As soon as I heard ...
Bel-dan,
The people of his city will be scattered;
He built anew Etemenanki, its walls 30 courses of brick high.
Concerning the news of the king, my lord, I have arrested all my prelates and gone to see the mother of the king.
... my water skin raft
Tribute from the land of the people of Ḫabḫu.
did not come ...
Shalmaneser, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (I), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of Aššur: builder of Ekur, the temple of the gods.
Concerning the watch about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... on the watch of the crown prince" —
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, (or) have changed or altered the proceedings...
Samsi... , his maid, son, ... s;
... his ... , ... my heart, the one who ... my good deeds, ... the one who ... , the one who ... , Esarhaddon, true shepherd, ... Akitu House, ...
A piece of lapis lazuli was set in a wooden base and was firmly fixed therein.
is his wailing woman ...
... their fields ...
... the king ...
I appointed two guards and two ... s in their charge. I told them: "Watch out for each other's bread, and don't eat each other's ... !"
... they have gone ...
Disregard that ... they will seize them for their own ...
As to what the king of all lands, my lord, wrote: "Go and see where ... is being built" —
Your servant Nabû-bel-šumati: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: I have sent my messenger to greet the king, the horses and the troops.
The sun which was eclipsed by the moon is (now) approaching the king. It will clear up.
... fish
A tablet of Aššur-zeru-ibni to Nergal-eṭir. Good health to my brother!
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. The very best of health to the king, my lord!
x hectares of field in the town of Šuranu, adjoining the road of Calah, adjoining the field of Aya-metunu, and adjoining the canal —
Will Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, be troubled and angry? Does your great divinity know it?
... the king, our lord
Witness Batudanu, scribe.
... they shall glaze the bricks.
of ...
... I will not change. The lord ...
Let their messenger come ...
Month ... , 1st day, the moon is seen.
Uaiteʾ (Uaiteʾ), together with his troops, who had not feared the weapons of (the god) Aššur, my lord, and had trusted in Naʾidu — they (the gods) brought about their defeat. The god Erra, the warrior, inflicted a heavy loss upon them and filled the plain with the corpses of their sons. He did not spare (anyone) among them, (and) he did not spare (any) of the cities where they were staying. The gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Adad,
After I had made the foundation(s) secure, I had a canebreak of the marsh planted over it. I had a ... made and I planted it over the foundation(s). I had a moat dug around it. I had a canal dug to its full extent on the four sides (of the moat) for the passage of my troops. I had a weapon-marked tree (and) a reed tree planted over it. I had it surrounded like a meadow.
in the temple ...
... outside
they say ...
“Should they make an uprising and rebellion against him, will they kill, plunder, loot, take (for themselves) by force?”
Marduk, prince of the gods, lord of the Igīgū and Anunnakū gods, king of the totality of the gods, Nusku, bearer of the holy scepter, goddess of the crown, king of the great gods, goddess Ištar, who rides the heavens, heroic, valiant,
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether the king or the palace supervisor, whoever sins against my royal statute and my royal command, and whoever sins against my personal treaty, and whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract with the god Aššur, may the god Aššur not listen to his prayers. May he not accept his supplications. May he not accept his prayers. May he not listen to his prayers. May he not accept his supplications.
Your servant Ašaredu: I would gladly die for the king of the lands, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king of the lands, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
Concerning the ...
... will be placed ...
The former ... s of the king, my lord, are dead.
I spoke with my heart and my mind, saying: "Whoever has sinned against the gods, may Šamaš not show them mercy." I ... their ... , their ... , their ... , their ... , their ... , their ... , their ... , their ... , their ...
Intercalary Adar (XII), ... th day, eponymy of ... , governor of ...
... set to ...
to ...
and ... with them ...
... Nabû-killanni
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, may Aššur, Sin, Šamaš, Bel and Nabû, the gods of the king, call him to account.
Witness Nabû-nammir, ...
Now then I have sent Esarhaddon, my son, with four hundred Assyrian troops. I have fastened a neck-stock around your enemy's neck and am sending him to you with the people who are with you.
... before me
Witness NN, scribe.
The king, my lord, can be glad indeed about Aššur-mukin-palu'a.
To the king, my lord: your servant, the chief of the ten (governor of Arbela). Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I am here; I will come and ...
Total 52: town of Arpad.
... are good. 3/2 ...
I have written ...
To the governor, my lord: your servant Nabû-duru-uṣur. Good health to my lord! The city of Der is well.
... I will go ...
... will become good for Akkad. In the steppe, ... will prosper.
Witness NN, scribe.
In the future, in days to come, may a later prince, when that temple becomes dilapidated and he rebuilds (it), restore my inscribed name to its place. (Then) the god Nabû, the august heir, will listen to his prayers.
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
The gods Aššur, Nabû, (and) Marduk granted me a reign without equal and exalted my good reputation to the heights.
Nergal-iddina, a total of 20 persons, a servant of Arrapha; ... ; NN, ... ;
... to Nineveh ... adjoining the main ...
In the future may a later prince, when that wall becomes dilapidated and he rebuilds (it), restore my monumental inscriptions and my inscribed name to their places. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
At that time, in my city Kār-Tukultī-Ninurta, I built anew Etemenanki, the ziggurrat, for the dwelling of the god Aššur, my lord, and I named it Eḫursaggalkurkurra. I made it more splendid than before and I deposited my monumental inscriptions.
... s have been stored in the house of ...
... the king, my lord
... I said to him
Zeru-ukin has given to Ahu-iddina.
... the king, my lord
to NN ...
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
Witness ... gaqar. Witness Arakki.
... I filled with terror. The hands of ... I cut off the hands of ... I conquered the land Karalla, the land Ḫatti, ... I captured alive ... I cut off the hands of ... I carried off ... I cut off the hands of ...
1, the daughter of the chief ... ;
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Witness Ispuzidu, butcher.
They told me that the house of Huhhurtu and the threshing floor have been plundered. They have taken the gold and the silver and given it to me.
Aššur-ila'i,
cure of ...
1, ... ;
... field ... in Šabirešu — not ...
It shall increase by a fourth.
Witness Aššur-le'i, ...
Šamaš-ila'i, chief ... , has taken it as a loan from Lu-balaṭ, ...
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, (i 5) capable shepherd, (and) leader of a widespread population, the one who fashioned image(s) of the deities (and) made (them) enter into their respective sanctuaries, (i 10) the one who carried out to perfection the rites of the gods, (and) made the great gods enter into their holy cella:
x male sheep — Se'-lahutu, chief shepherd, son of the commander-in-chief;
Eight ... s whom ... gave to the king, my lord ...
(As for) Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, the brother of the enemy who had spoken evil things about Assyria and had plotted evil deeds, he became frightened on the day of the battle and his heart pounded. He fled alone like a fox and his (hiding) place could not be found.
Your servant Hamat: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to my lord:
Month Kislev (IX), 3rd day, eponym year of Sennacherib.
Witness ... -zeri. Witness ... , queen.
5 cans of beer;
These gods are loyal to Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, and Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, and his brothers, sons by the same mother as Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, and the rest of the offspring of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, and they will speak favorable things about him before his enemy.
I shall wait for him ... ; afterwards I shall go to my presence.
At that time the temple of the god Nabû, which Adad-nārārī (I), son of Šamšī-Adad (V), king of Assyria, a king who preceded me, had previously built — had become dilapidated and old. I removed its dilapidated parts, repaired its dilapidated parts, (and) made (it) high as a mountain. I roofed it with long beams of cedar. I made its structure larger than the one before. I made its plan more perfect.
... the town Gabbaru, a vacant lot, ... the town Gabbaru, Man(nu)-našuh,
... are left
... , x+23 persons; NN, cohort commander;
Witness Remanni-Adad, carpenter.
From Dur-Šarruken.
3 ditto of copper;
Concerning Aššur-rēša-iši ...
Witness Nergal-šarru-uṣur, 'third man.'
... in the presence of a wooden ...
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods:
He shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
They are staying in Sadiru; as soon as they come to ... ,
One of the officials who brought him into the temple, and the vessels of gold which ... , the king's son, has stationed before his father, who has now been seated before Bel and Nabû, and the wine which he drinks, is the wine of the palace. The bread which he drinks is the bread of the palace.
... as follows: "This village is exempt, all the ... of the town of Iqbi-Bel are exempt."
before the gods ...
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, ask him whatever his case is.
3 ...
You place a bowl of ... before Šamaš, (and) sing, “... ”
(               Break               )
Just as a sick person is not well, so may you not be well.
... in the hands of my messenger
The king, my lord, said: "It is a bad omen. It is not of the land, it is not of Aplaya, son of Nadinu. And it is not of the Arabs."
Witness Pan-Issar-lamur.
... and ...
Ebabbar, “House of the Rising Sun”: the house of the goddess Ištar, my lady, which is inside Eanna, which a former king had built and whose construction he had carried out correctly — its foundations had become weak and its superstructure was tottering. I removed its dilapidated section(s) and (then) I made its structure larger than before. I made its foundations as secure as a mountain. I made its appearance resplendent. I offered sumptuous offerings and presented my gift(s).
Witness Nabû-eriba, deputy team commander.
You shall not sin against this treaty of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, which is (written) upon Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, and his brothers, sons by the same mother as Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, and the rest of the offspring of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord.
Haya, Kusu in the side room, Kittu in the side room, Ea-šarru in the well, Damkina, Gula, Malik, Uqurutu: total (of gods) in the house of Ea-šarru.
In the citadel of Nineveh, behind the temple of Sîn and Šamaš, in the reign of Esarhaddon, my beloved son, ...
From this day, the 10th day of this month, the month ... , to the ... th day of the month ... of this year, for 30 days and nights, my stipulated term —
Disregard that they (may) go down to the river and to the city Ashkelon ...
Witness Balasî, ...
which he killed ...
He did not question or see
x camels, 30 oxen, 30 sheep —
... rings of gold ...
An estate of 40 (hectares of) land in the town of ...
The rest which Nabû-šumu-iškun and Adad-... gave to Bel-duri, the governor, and to Šakil-Aya.
... you do not know. Your ... and your heart are full of lies. Whoever sins against me, I do not spare him.
The 12th day: he will be shut up in a prison.
1, (governor of) Calah;
If he does not pay, he shall give a donkey in its place to Adad-bel-na'id.
Month ... , xth day, eponym year of Manzarnê, ... of the city Kar-Babili.
84 pairs of sandals for 2 minas and 53 shekels of silver from Kummuh, which the merchants did not bring in.
3 2-seah jars of hinhinu-seeds;
his sons ...
... according to this ...
Month Shebat (XI), 1st day, eponym year of Zazakku.
I will go as far as the border and enter (it).
... before ...
... 10 — (governor of) ...
The man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, who has appealed to Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, your servant, for the release of the haruspex, saying: "...
Witness Namû.
I put to the sword the population of the city Ḫirimmu, a dangerous enemy, and I did not spare a single one. I hung their corpses on poles and placed (them) around the city. I reorganized that district (and) imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the gods of Assyria, my lords.
2 cuts of shoulder from an ox of the temple of Dagan — of the chief cupbearer.
I gave ...
Month Adar (XII), 18th day.
Whoever breaks the contract, the king, my lord, should know (this).
... in Nineveh. The king should not go and make me an enemy in the king my lord's hands. Let me hear from the king my lord's mouth that I may come to the Palace of the king my lord. The king, my lord, should not make me an enemy among the Babylonians, my brothers.
Puzî;
... ;
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
... adjoining the road that leads to the village of ...
... chariot, 2 ...
This is its interpretation.
... is placed.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, and Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the rab mūgi, should go against Ikkalû,
Ištar, lady ... , ... ,
May Palil, the foremost wife, look at you angrily and curse you!
Total 4 ...
... in my presence
adjoining the field of Gubalayu,
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. The best of health to the king, my lord!
As to the news of the city of Ashur, he is the one who ... whom the king, my lord, wrote to me. Mukin-zeri ...
On the ... th day he returned and wrote to the king of Elam: "... my messenger ... to Bit-Bunakki. He says: 'Umman-menanu, the herald, and Bur-Salli are in Bit-Bunakki. He says: "The king of Elam is coming to Bit-Bunakki. His chariots are with the king in Bit-Bunakki."
Now ...
9 Kassite women;
As to the Qutian chariot owners about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Ask them!" — there are no bread and seed corn there.
1, (governor of) Hatarikka;
... is split. In ...
2 homers of barley — the gods
Tell the governor of Calah to send me a cart so I can pull it along the street of Ubasê. Let him give me the cart ...
shall place 10 minas of silver (and) x minas of gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
35 homers, the wine master;
From Pan-Marduk.
1 mina, Nabû-... ;
40 ditto of ... ;
The princes who had come out, the Lahiru, the Lahiru, and the Hamureans spoke as follows: "We will not go out of the city until ... "
To the vizier, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. Good health to the vizier, my lord!
Witness Ilumma-le'i.
6 oxen, 40 hectares of arable land near the city of Harran, 100 hectares under cultivation therein.
... is finished
... the weapon of the first-ranking ...
The charge of the priest to Ereškigal is doing very well indeed. We have not yet sent a report to Šamaš-šumu-ukin. What is it that the king, my lord, commands?
To the king, my lord: your servant Šulmu-beli. Good health to the king, my lord!
Arbakku of the land Arnasi,
or in ... ,
Witness Zababa-eriba, 'third man.'
in ...
Concerning the tribute horses of the king, my lord, ... the king, my lord, ...
Aššur sets out ...
... the sign ...
... farmer ... , 1 woman, 1 house, ... — (governor of) Balihu.
x, in the charge of Huda-Dada,
... Sivan (III) ...
... before them
... the governors
... their ... s in ...
The king should know that your servants have been sold for money.
... Bēlat-ekalli
... the land of Sūḫu
... of Nabû-šarru-ka''in ...
... before ... Aššur-rēša-iši ... to his entirety ... his wrath ...
The king, my lord, can be glad indeed about the fort. He has made the men enter there.
... this ...
... to the sons of Zazî
1, ditto, of ivory;
I have spoken to the king, my lord, about my case.
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, and (then) I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, fortified cities, together with the small(er) settlements in their environs (and) the district of the land Bīt-Barrû in its entirety, and I added (
Guzana
If a star rises in the west: the king of Akkad will exercise world rule.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
... s, ... , first fruits,
... , a total of x persons,
... Arbela
x talents 4 1/2 minas of scarlet dye for red wool.
a cup of ... ;
... against the Assyrians
... they will glaze bricks
10 shekels of silver belonging to Urda-Aya, at the disposal of Kitti-muti.
... ayu, governor;
Month of the Open Gate, eponymy of Atar-ili, governor of the city Laḫīru (673 BC).
10 minas of silver ...
... I ... the god Šamaš ... I set in motion ... my foot ...
... Now he has run away with ... and come ... He has stolen ... , saying: "The chief ...
... the king, my lord, ...
Witness Haldi-naṣir, royal bodyguard.
Your servant Salamanu: I would gladly die for the palace of the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: The land of the king is well.
I decorated them (the palatial halls) in a splendid fashion. I adorned them with silver (and) copper knobbed nails. I adorned the arches, friezes, and all of their copings with baked bricks (glazed in the color of) obsidian (and) lapis lazuli.
... Saya, Marduk-šumu-uṣur. Month ...
of Ammu-la-Balaṭ ...
If Venus disappears in the west in Ab (V): there will be a fall of Elam ...
In the days of ...
... is complete
May Anu, Enlil and Ea, the gods who created you, let you live forever in Esaggil, which you love!
The rest ...
From Nabû-iqbi.
x, (with) 'foot'-mark, 14 'bones' (and) 30 'joints';
... seized ...
... ši-duri, his son,
Witness Aššur-le'i, 'third man.'
Issar-ša-...
The (people) who are on the house of the crown prince, the storehouse and the storehouse of the house of the crown prince, are not of Remanni-Aššur and Aššur-reši-išši.
Milki-luram,
... Se'-abu, ...
The lady of his palace will go out to pay her respects to the land of Hatti and Elam.
That which is (written) upon the skin of the necklace of the two lions.
... chariot ...
... these
... the king, my lord
... his rebellion
... the ... s of ... are present. The ... is absent. The 'well-being' is destroyed...
Lu-remanni, ... ;
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
Let the king do as he deems best.
Sagibi-šarri, ... ;
Kaštaritu, city lord of Karkaššî, or Dusanni, the Sapardean, or the Cimmerians, or the Medes, or the Manneans, or any other enemy, will capture that city, Kilman.
... house ...
At the beginning of my reign, in my first regnal year, when the god Aššur, king of the gods, made me sit on the throne of my father, the god Anu, the creator of the universe, the god Enlil, the bearer of his throne, the god Ninurta, the bearer of his weapon, the god Nergal, the judge of the land, the one who makes the land prosper, and the goddess Bēlet-ilī, the queen, look with pleasure upon me and, by their exalted command, I constantly saw the good de
On the first day ... Nergal, the guarantor ... , should be appointed, and I shall speak to the king of all lands ... I will bring the feet of the king of all lands to Babylon.
... seah of 8 'litres'
In the course of their (the gods’) exalted journey, they (the gods) became angry and furious. The people living in the city were frightened by the clangor of their (the gods’) battle array. The terrifying radiance of their fierce battle, which cannot be withstood, overwhelmed the people ... the people ...
Disregard that ...
(As for) the one who alters (my) work, may the god Aššur, my lord, overthrow his sovereignty (and) destroy his name and his seed from the land.
I shall lay it down ...
The king, my lord, should have a look at the many years that I have been serving and the many days that I have been waiting for his good news. What have you done? You have torn off my garments.
By means of a reed basket, I crossed over (the river).
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
... the king, my lord, should ...
... Bit-Kisia
... palace ... he ... the people of the cities ... not to be changed ... to Nineveh ... between ... as in ... he made the land happy ... he established their ...
... as far as the river
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "What news of the son of Zerî is there?" He has gone to Puqudu and returned from Uruk. My messenger has gone to Sapia and reported back as follows: "The news of the report is good. The king, my lord, can be glad."
... we kept watch
In the middle surface of the 'finger' there is a hole. The right side of the 'finger' is located towards the left.
x minas of silver, of Ilu-dalâ, deputy of Haurina.
Whoever seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Remanni-Adad, chariot driver, his sons (and) his grandsons, shall place one talent of refined silver and one mina of pure gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his non-lawsuit and not succeed.
Witness Nabû-šezib, chariot driver.
... I said to him, "...
Written according to the original and collated.
Total 589 horses, 8 mules.
Palace of Sargon (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad.
Should Assurbanipal, the crown prince of the Succession Palace, strive and plan? Is it pleasing to your great divinity?
If Venus is low and dark: the days of the king will be long.
The one who is assiduous towards their shrines, who makes abundant the offerings, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, am I —
Why ...
14 ...
Nabû-šar-ahhešu;
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, scribe.
... you should have given me. If it is agreeable to the king, my lord, let me appoint ... in Akkad. If not, let the eunuch ... this work ... and the corn taxes ... and the straw taxes ...
Now they have sent me a letter in a sealed envelope, saying: "How did you act?"
He shall place two minas of silver upon the corn heap, and redeem his field.
8 'litres' ...
Now then the whole city is mobilized against Ariye. They are talking about killing him in the same way as the legate.
I have sent ...
And ... for the ... of the temple of Ištar, for the temple of the Sebetti, for the temple of the Seven Gods, for the temple of Adad of the Ziggurat, for the temple of Adad of the Ziggurat, for the temple of Adad of the Ziggurat, for the temple of Adad of the Ziggurat, for the temple of Adad of the Ziggurat, for the temple of Adad of the Ziggurat, for the temple of Adad of the Ziggurat, for the temple of Adad
The Medes ...
I carried off into my presence the people of the land Meḫru, the chariots, troops, (and) equipment of the land Meḫru, which had not submitted to the yoke of my chariots and troops, and I brought (them) to the land Elam. I conquered, plundered, destroyed, devastated, (and) burned the cities Libê, their fortified city, (and) Sūrara, (and) the cities Abqu, Arurra, (and) Arurê, which are between Mount Urikni, Mount Ariun
You place a libation bowl on the terrace ... , pour water, and sing, “The cupbearer is filled.” You place a libation bowl of a cup of water, and sing, “You are filled.”
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-šumu-ukin. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I had my camp pitched at the city Susa, the seat of the great lord, the god Adad, and I spent the night in joyful celebration. I had my camp pitched at the city Šarru-in-Zamua, which is in the district of the city Šušna, and I had the people of the city Šušna, who had rebelled against the god Aššur, bow down to my yoke. I made the people of the city Šušna, who had plundered the land Urarṭu, bow down to my yoke
Se'-dalâ,
... of the report of the king ...
Witness Mannu-ki-Ninua, ...
Now then
If the moon and sun are in opposition: there will be truth in the land, and the son will speak the truth with his father.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether these men or their sons or grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Kakkullanu and his sons,
Witness Nabû-šallimšunu.
News of ...
(As for) Umba-Laguda, who sat on the throne of the land Elam in opposition to Ummanaldašu (Ḫumban-ḫaltaš III), he heard about the conquest of the city Bubilu, a city that was a lordly residence of his, and fear fell upon him. He flew away like a bird to inaccessible heights.
From the city ... u and the city ...
To the goddess Ištar, mistress of the lands, the queen of the gods, the 'handiwork' of the gods, the 'base of the throne' ... , the one who makes the scepter shine, ... , the one who makes the crown shine, ... , the one who makes the foundation of the throne firm, ... , the one who makes the foundation of the throne secure, ... , the one who makes the base of the throne stable, ... , the one who makes the foundation of the throne endure, ... , the one who makes the foundation of the throne last, ... , the
On the 18th day the king went down to the House of God.
... many ... s have been sold for money.
To the king of the lands, my lord: your servant Bel-ušezib. May Bel, Nabû and Šamaš bless the king, my lord!
... Marduk-aplu-iddina from ...
x straight garments, ditto, the edging ... ;
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
The city-lord ... has taken away the houses; why does he not listen to me? Their houses have not been destroyed!"
his scribe.
... will go
I have not yet gone to the king my lord's house. He will come into my presence tomorrow. I will stand in front of him and speak to him. Let the king my lord write to him that the house of Uqayu is completely destroyed, and that he should stand in the presence of the chief cupbearer, and do whatever he says.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Total 71 seahs — for Nineveh.
Disregard that the day is overcast and it has rained ...
x men ...
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
... Ištar ...
Nabû-šarru-uṣur says: "...
Seal of Nabû-šallim-ahhe, son of Pan-Nabû-ṭemi,
If Venus comes close to Jupiter: the king of the Westland will become strong and have no rival ...
In Kislev (IX), on the 15th day, let him take Nergal-laqbi and put him in his hands, and let him go on a journey.
... of obsidian;
The money is paid completely. That woman is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Total 6 ...
May Anu, the father of the gods, break his scepter, may Enlil, the lord, destroy his name, may the fates, which are decreed, remove his days, may they erase his years.
1, mayor of Arbela;
200 ditto, kirrutu-meal;
Witness ...
before ...
... Now ...
... , gardener of the vineyard; ...
If on the 16th day the moon and sun are seen together: one king will send hostile messages to another; the king will be shut up in his palace for the length of a month; the step of the enemy will be set towards his land; the enemy will march around victoriously.
If Adad thunders at its left horn: there will be an eclipse of the Westland; the king of the Westland will fall.
The gate of the secret word ...
... his people
This night the moon was surrounded by a halo, Scorpius stood in it.
10 hectares, the town ... ;
Sasû, his servant —
... of field in Kuluna
Jupiter stood in the sky for a long time.
From Bulluṭu.
Kamanu, his servant, a Tabalean —
... saw ...
... ;
With a happy heart and a joyful mood, I marched triumphantly throughout all of the extensive land of Sumer and Akkad. I had my camp pitched at Mount Ḫalzi, a rugged mountain.
... the xth day, when the bread is offered, the ... of the king ...
2 prayer bowls ditto, 1 1/4 mina;
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have seen fear and terror at night, have changed or altered the proceedings, (or) jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, conqueror of the land of the Qutu, the land of the Uqāya, and all of the lands of the Ḫittites; the one who subdued the land of the Qutu, the land of the Šubaru, the entire land of the Amurru, the land of the Šubaru, the land of the Purulumzu, the land of the Alzu, the land of the Šubaru, the entire land of the Šub
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also king of the world (and) king of Assyria: conqueror from the passes of Mount Habruru to the land Gilzānu. Crossed the Tigris from its source to the land Šubria. (10) (and) crossed the Eup
... who did not submit to the kings, my ancestors, and did not send his message to them, ... the one who destroyed the land Ḫatti and made the territory of Assyria expand, who sent his envoys to Kalḫu before me,
Witness Ilu-remanni.
... Milki-suri... , his wife
The adjutant(s) who brought them in have been paid off.
The 2nd day you ...
Month Tammuz (IV), 22nd day, in Adian.
Month ... , 8th day, eponym year of Aššur-da''inanni.
Total 78 men ...
Tribute of Kutāšpi of the city Kummuḫu, Raḫiānu of the land Damascus, Meniḫimme of the city Samaria, Ḫirumme of the city Tyre, Sibitti of the city Byblos, Uriakki of the land Que, Pisīri of the city Carchemish, Enīl-Marduk of the city Ḫamatāya, Parnamu of the city Samʾal, Tarḫulara of the land Gurgum, Sulamālu
Written according to the original and collated.
My brother has written to me from my men: the 'third man' is coming. He has not yet arrived in my presence, but the rest of the troops of the city-rulers are with him.
The base of the middle part is 'bound.' The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
... I said: "...
1 ring, 9 mares:
... them
... to his brother ...
The servants of the king are in the house of ... ; they are ... to the governor.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, have jumbled the oracle query in my mouth, or changed (or) altered the proceedings...
Now ...
... have fled
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ahhe-eriba. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
La-qepu ...
... ;
I will not ... the ... , I will not ... the ... , I will not ... the ... , I will not ... the ... ,
Let the king ask the deputy of ... , why did the king give me ... ? These days, when you give me the bread, I give it back to you.
Witness Banitu. Witness Urda-Nanaya.
... the 7th day is good, the 8th day ...
The god Aššur, the god Šamaš, the god Adad, the god Ber, ... , the god Aššur, the lord of the gods, the creator, the one who loves him, the one who has extended his protection over the totality of heaven and netherworld, the one who has established the destiny of the land, the one who has made the foundation of the throne firm, the one who has made the great mountain rise up, the one who has made the wide earth quake, the one who has made the sea surge, the one who has made the great sea rise
To the king, my lord: your servant Šarru-ila'i. Good health to the king, my lord!
... the king's men
Balasî, ...
and the life of Ku...
Witness NN.
... the king, my lord
Witness Ibašši-ilani, son of Nergal-ila'i.
... of copper
the king, my lord, ...
Uasî, son of Ta'la-ila'i, gardener; Našuh-dilini, 3 women: a total of 3 people.
Gugū, king of the land Lulim, a barbarian whose home is remote, who had not heard of the might of the kings, my ancestors, and did not fear their lordly majesty, saw the might of (the god) Aššur (and) the goddess Babu, who had called by name (the one who was) the favorite of the god Aššur, king of the gods, lord of all, the one who subdued all of his enemies and ruled all of the kings of the (four) quarters, and (then) he sent his messenger
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, I will settle it in my presence. I will bring them all in and give them back what they have taken.
I sent my officials, the governors of the border of his land, to inquire about their well-being. They reported back to me as follows: The city Qirbit, his fortified city, had been destroyed by fire. They had razed that city and burned it down.
... Third extispicy...
an estate of 8 decares of field adjoining the side road of Sairi, adjoining the field of Bel-ibni,
Concerning Šarru-emuranni about whom the king, my lord, gave me orders, I said: "Your horses and men must not pass before the king!" —
20 hectares of arable land, 10 hectares under cultivation therein.
x mules from Kilizi:
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord!
The scholar ... as far as the city of Marubiš.
... his ...
x bags of lentils, a big vat of soup.
Ea, who opens up the springs, the one who controls the underground waters, the one who opens up the gate of the Abyss, the one who controls the flow of the source,
... to your aid which ...
I have written to the king, my lord, that I have collected 260 horses, 13 small (soldiers), 277 horses, 15 men, a total of 527 horses and 28 men in their charge. There are no men and horses left, and I have no scribe in the king my lord's service. The king, my lord, should ask him.
I shall tell it to Belšunu: "Send me troops to keep watch for me!"
which in the palace of the king ...
Adad-nerari (III), king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, son of Arik-dīn-ili, king of Assyria, son of Enlil-nārārī (who was) also king of Assyria:
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
From Rašil the older, servant of the king.
All this, which is (written) on a tablet.
Total 160 tables, consumption.
until ...
... the king's ...
a snake ...
x shekels of silver upon him.
... to the king, my lord
From Balasî.
... to the king
... to the feet
1 writing-board ...
horse trainers.
If the baker, having planned, sends the bread to the temple, and places it before your great divinity, and the priest to the cella of Marduk ...
... did not go ... He returned and put on the jewellery, and dressed himself in his finery.
I wrote ...
... who from the beginning ... I built ...
... them ... to the house ...
The lower part ...
The vineyard of the regular offerings of Aššur and Mullissu —
And when the chief tailor spoke untruthfully to the king, he did not know whether he had spoken the truth or not.
... and the head
The one who has heard the praise of Aššur and my gods, will go forth and see the praise of my heroism in Bit-Bunakki.
(As for) me, Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of the gods, by the command of the gods Aššur, Anu, (and) Enlil, I had the land Bīt-Yakīn, which the land of the people of the land Ḫatti had taken away by force in the distant past, annexed to Assyria. I made (the people of) those lands carry baskets (of earth) and they made bricks.
Witness Aššur-reṣuwa, eunuch, scribe of the queen.
... their harvest
Let the king, my lord, write me quickly so that I can set out.
... you say ...
of the weapon ...
Witness Šamaš. Witness Nergal.
To the god Aššur, father of the gods, great lord, his lord:
and Nabû-ušallim ...
I, Nabonidus, king of Babylon, the one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, the one who reveres the great gods, am the one who built (and) completed the sanctuaries of the gods Bēl (Marduk) and Nabû.
The 'third man' of the chariot ...
4 talents of iron, capital, belonging to the iron smiths of the Inner City, are not being paid for by the mina of silver in the centre of Harran.
... house ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
The king, my lord, has treated the son of Dakuru justly. The king, my lord, has said: "Dakuru ... "
We shall go to the place of the observation ... , and the king, my lord, should send a messenger to the Inner City and Arbela.
saying: "The former one was Nabû, the latter one was ... "
NN, shepherd; in all x persons, the town of Til-U... , in the district of the city of Sarugi.
Witness Zarutî, cohort commander.
Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan) ...
... -ibni, farmer, his servant —
Witness Abdi-Ramman, ...
You will put your trust in your palace, but you will be troubled and angry with your god. Your son will be your king, but he will be troubled before Ninurta.
The king, my lord, should know (this). In his fifth regnal year he said to me: "Why did you not tell me about the treaty until now?"
Month Tishri (VII), ... th day, eponym year of Nabû-kenu-uṣur.
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
(As for) the one who alters my handiwork, may the gods Aššur, Adad, (and) the great gods glare at him angrily and make his name (and) his seed disappear from the land!
Witness Asî.
The engraver who drew it said: "It is not ... ; it is not ... to anyone."
Witness Paqaha, village manager.
Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Concerning the fortress about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "I have received ... Zalaya ... the Samaneans ... have passed before us ... " — when they told me this, I said: "...
... I shall come. The mayors
all his ... the throne ...
... they did not do their work
10 ... ;
... the word ...
... months
Ditto by Ištar of Nineveh and Ištar of Arbela!
In the future, may a future ruler, one of the kings, my descendants, whom Aššur and Ištar name to rule the land and the people, renovate its dilapidated section(s) when that wall becomes old and dilapidated. May he find an inscribed object bearing my name, anoint (it) with oil, make an offering, (and) return (it) to its place.
Witness Aplu-uṣur, enemy of Bel-ša-iqbi.
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Now the messengers of the sons of Mukin-zeri have crossed over to Puqudu.
If the sun rises and its light is yellow: ...
Witness Nuhšaya, porter.
You place two turtledoves before Šamaš, and recite the incantation:
... and you will make your position secure ...
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Šulmu-... , governor of ...
2 ... ;
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
As to what you wrote to me: "When the servants of the king, my lord, brought me (this order): 'Let your servants send (word) that they should bring you 100 men, and let them write to you that the Quean troops who have come to you should be sent to Bel-la-taqqin — send them to me!' — I have sent them to you. I have also sent to you all the troops who have come to me according to the command of the king, my lord."
Nabû-naʾid (and) Bēl-ēṭir, sons of Nabû-šuma-ēreš, the šandabakku (governor of Nippur) whose father, the one who had engendered them, had taken away the tribute of the land Akkad, (and) who had brought (it) to Assyria, cut off the feet of Nabû-šuma-ēreš, who had fled from the land Gambulu to Assyria, (and) had them (the citizens of Nineveh) drag
Bel-iqišanni,
Witness NN. Witness Barruqu.
I have written to Urmah ...
Witness Quleî.
all to ...
Concerning the farmer, the shepherd and the ...
In Tishri (VII) the watch of the moon will be (kept) for me.
All this, of Aššurayu.
who ... ed you
The people are scattered, and their houses
The king mounts the rikshaw ...
A letter of the palace supervisor to Indabiya and Uraš-... , my sons.
I have written to you; do not be negligent ...
Nabû-eriba, son of Nabû-dammiq, ...
Silver is his finger-ring.
Total 23 horses,
Month Ab (V), 18th day, eponym year of NN.
After the king, my lord, has taken his seat on the throne, Bel-ahhe-eriba ... will come from ... On the day he comes, ...
... the bakers, as ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-šumu-ka''in. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Bel bless the king, my lord!
The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number. Check-up...
If Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, goes to the ziggurrat of his sons in the area of the akītu-house, and Ashurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, seizes the throne of Assyria, will he, as long as he holds the throne of Assyria, exercise the kingship of Babylon, and will he exercise the kingship of the land of Sumer and Akkad, will he live in his presence, and will he be completely satisfied with Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, his father?
They shall pay at the threshing floor of the city of Argasu. If they do not, they shall increase by 5 seahs per homer.
1 silver tribute bowl;
In the reign of Sargon (II), king of the gods, the god Aššur, for the work of Ešarra ... , the true shrine, the exalted sanctuary, the pure cella, the lofty dais, the eternal dais, the shrine of the goddesses, the pure shrine, the exalted shrine, the shrine of the goddesses, the pure shrine, the exalted shrine, the shrine of the goddesses, the pure shrine, the exalted shrine, the shrine of the
NN, ditto ... ;
... today
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why is it that they give (them) for the life of the king, for the life of the woman, but not for the life of the man?"
straw ...
The king stands up and seizes the singer. He sings, “... ,”
Nabû-mušeṣi, deputy of the chief scribe;
I have seen the moon, and the sun has become faint.
... I said to my lord
... the gate of the Firmament ...
... have been done ...
... I have sent ...
... who
Concerning the gold for the fingernail, about which the king, my lord, wrote to me:
I said to him: "Bring me from among your servants, let me stand in my presence, and I will bring you in."
The dais of destiny of the god Aššur, in which he had taken up residence, became old and dilapidated. The kings, my ancestors, had repaired it, but it had again become dilapidated. In the third regnal year of my reign, I completely rebuilt it from top to bottom. I made it more splendid than before. I dedicated (it) to the god Aššur, my lord, and to my son, Ashurbanipal, the perfect heir who was created in the womb of my own mother.
Witness Nabû-balassu-iqbi, baker.
The money is paid completely. That field, house, threshing floor, garden, and well are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Witness NN, ... of the central city.
... the eclipse which took place in the morning
If the Old Man star comes close to the top of the moon and stands there: the king will become angry with his land; there will be hostility in his land.
... garden ...
their ... s ...
... Aššur-šarru-uṣur
To the king, my lord: your servant Mannu-ki-Adad. Good health to the king, my lord!
... them
Concerning what Bel-iddina said to the king, my lord: "... s to the deputy ...
Witness NN, 'third man' of the chariotry.
On the 30th day the moon disappeared; the king spoke as follows: "This is not a sign, it is not a portent." On the 27th day the moon disappeared; on the 29th day the moon disappeared in the sky, and on the 30th day it disappeared. For four days it disappeared in the sky, and for four days it did not.
Ditto, ditto; may they make you like a fly, may they cover you with honey and oil, and may they turn you into a caged bird.
to the king, my lord, ...
... persons ...
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Sagab (651).
... fish ...
Seal of Bur-... ,
Nabû-balassu-iqbi
... this ...
How, when the boat is in the middle of the river, the reed thicket is cut, and the water is low, is it possible to cross over?
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... the Gambulians
The architect ...
2 ditto — Ilu-ba... , ditto — Ba...
... the goddesses Bēlet-ilī, ... , Ḫaya, ...
Remanni-Issar has gone to the town Kar-Aššur in accordance with the road that leads to it.
O lord, exalted lord, king of Sippar, the one who loves your great divinity, (5) the one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, the one who makes bricks (and) erects the cedar roof-beams, the one who provides for the shrines, the one who makes the offerings abundant, the one who provides for the cult centers, the one who makes the sanctuaries shine, the one who provides for the sanctuaries, the one who provides for the cult centers, the one who provides for the sanctuaries, the one
... entered ... , and he has been riding a mule.
Disregard that ... for the heart of the troops ...
... is good. The road ...
Your servant, the šandabakku: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! May Enlil, Ninurta and Nusku bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
If the moon becomes visible in Sivan (III) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
Witness Nabû-na'id, palace farmer.
The chief eunuch opens his ear and says: “The gods have heard ... ”
Saninu, who ... to ... , has sold the son of Sasâ for half a mina of gold to ... , and has taken 50 ... from him.
They have made a golden statue of the goddess Ningal, the first-born one, and have fashioned it in the likeness of the statue of the goddess Tanat. They have made ... golden ... s of the arms of the goddess Tanat, ... golden ... s of the arms of the goddess Tanat, ... golden ... s of the arms of the goddess Tanat, ... golden ... s of the arms of the goddess Tanat, ... golden ... s of the arms of the goddess Tanat, ... golden ... s of the arms of the goddess Tanat, ...
If the moon and sun are in opposition: the king of the land will widen his understanding.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
... and in the name of the king who does not revere Marduk, king of Babylon ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
I conquered the lands Sallia (and) Lušme to their full extent (and) the land Alzu.
All is well with ...
... the fort
Ribu... , king ...
Witness Šumma-ilani.
1 prayer bowl ditto;
Moreover, (as for) Ṣidqâ, the king of the city Ashkelon who had not bowed down to my yoke, I forcibly removed the gods of his father’s house, together with his possessions, and took (them) to Assyria.
... of the Li'tamu ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
Now then I am sending Nabû-eṭir, my messenger, to the Palace to speak with my father. If he does not return alive, I shall write to the Palace.
(As for) the one who alters his words, destroys my royal inscription, or changes its position: may the god Sîn, the great lord, glare at him angrily and determine a bad fate for him!
5 talents, the New Palace of Calah;
I appointed over them Bēl-ibni, a son of a rab banî (and) a scion of Šuanna (Babylon), who had grown up like a young puppy in my palace, as king of the land of Sumer and Akkad.
1 head-cloth, of Nabû-ahhe-eriba, the delegate of Tyre.
Month Iyyar (II), 10th day, eponym year of Zazaya, governor of Arpad.
(As for) the Cimmerians, a dangerous enemy who had never feared my ancestors, and who did not respect the oath(s sworn) by (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar, my lords, he (Ummanaldašu) sat on the throne of the land Qedar and constantly plundered the land Amurru. He did not respect my treaty (and) he disregarded my favorable decisions.
On my third campaign, I marched against Ahseri, the king of the land Mannea. By the command of the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Nergal, (and) Nusku, I entered the land Mannea and I conquered (and) plundered twenty of his fortified cities, together with small(er) settlements in their environs, as far as the
... will be placed.
Month of the god Sîn, first day, eponymy of Ša-Adad-nīnu.
Witness Bel-abu'a.
La-... , ... of Šep-... , for 40 ...
7 big loaves;
which are in the river of Bit-Ugirtu, 370 of them have been dug out.
shall place 10 minas of refined silver and one mina of pure gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
At that time, the temple of Aššur, my lord, which kings who preceded me had previously built, had become dilapidated and old. I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I made the foundation of the temple of Aššur, my lord, as firm as a mountain. I laid its foundations on limestone and made its structure as strong as a mountain. I built the temple of Aššur, my lord, for its (text: “his”) life and made it as bright as day. I built two towers at the gates of the
... the Babylonians ...
The singer washes his hands, performs a sheep offering, burns a female kid, and says: “The king is my lord, the king is my lord.”
Iqisu,
Go and ... !"
Witness NN, royal bodyguard.
I am Mullissu ...
... the gods of the king. If ... , the king ...
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur, eunuch.
As to what the king, my lord, said: "... on the 10th, 11th, 15th and ... th day to ...
May your gardens and your fields ... !
Adad-apla-iddina, son of the goddess Ninkal-kina, king of Babylon, Uṣur-amāssu, the one who renovates Ekišnugal, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines, the one who reveres the king, my lord.
The king, my lord, should not say: "He has not done it."
On the 16th day Abi-rahî came and brought the tribute. On the 17th day he left from Malak and arrived in Adian. The sunset which ...
... they became frightened ... they captured alive the (king) of the land Judah (... ) ... they took away from me the chariots, wagons, (and) military equipment that they had carried off ... they became frightened by my weapons ... they came to fear my name. They became servants of mine.
Witness ...
In the future may a later prince, when that wall becomes old and dilapidated, restore it. May he restore my inscribed name and my inscribed name to its place. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-aplu-iddina.
Concerning the saplings about which the king, my lord, wrote to me, they should be brought in and planted immediately. The new saplings should be brought in to Dur-Šarruken in the month Adar (XII).
Bir-Ramman ...
The merchant from Carchemish killed his servants, but they did not let me go out. I have appealed to the goddess Mullissu, the goddess of Kidmuri, the mother who created me, and the king, my lord.
I had a foundation inscription written in my name and the praise of the god Aššur, the great lord, my lord, written on it and I placed (it) in it. I built (and) completed that palace and deposited (it) therein.
Seal of Nabû-riba-ahhe, scribe.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
"... chief eunuch ...
x ditto of refined oil, 3 seahs of chick-peas, 3 'litres' of lentils,
2,000 ... ;
The king, my lord, has entrusted the care of Šummu-ilu, son of Araš-šarru-ilani, the recruitment officer, to me.
a ... ;
The wild bull which is slain is the wild bull which Bel slays. The slayer of the wild bull is Anu. The wild bull which Bel slays is the wild bull which Bel slays.
Mannu-ki-... ;
A bull, a large horn, their harvest ...
... his eyes ... Ull... he approached
... his face
The best of health to my lord!
The land of the king is well, the fort is well, the king, my lord, can be glad.
... your ... , the land Ḫanigalbat.
Tab-shar-Ashur,
... the son of Anu
Monument of Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of the deities Aššur, Anu, Sîn, Šamaš, Adad, (and) Bēl (Marduk), the one who built the temple of the goddess Bēlet-ilī, the one who renovated the shrines of the gods Aššur, his lord, (and) the one who fashioned image(s) of the deities Aššur, Bēl (Marduk), N
In the garden, in the orchard, in the house, in the courtyard, in the street, in the square, in the meadow, in the marsh, in the reed thicket, in the canebreak, in the grove, in the forest, in the meadow, in the marsh, in the reed thicket, in the grove, in the forest, in the meadow, in the marsh, in the reed thicket, in the grove, in the forest, in the meadow, in the marsh, in the reed thicket,
Mannu-ki-Arbail, the ... , and the scribes ... who came with me have been ... ed.
Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, viceroy of Ur, son of Ningal-iddin, viceroy of Ur, built Eešagalanki, the temple of the goddess Ningal, his lady.
I tore down that small palace in its entirety, from its foundations to its battlements. I diverted the course of the Tebilti River from the center of the city and directed its outflow.
... the king, my lord
Witness Kimamaya.
Witness Abdi-Daddi, chief of the pack-animals.
A tablet of ... -Sin to the king, his lord: Say to the king, my lord:
The 'weapon'-mark of the 'increment' rises to the left.
Month Nisan (I), eponym year of Ereš-ilu.
... said to me
Now, let the king, my lord, send a letter to Il-yada' concerning the review. And let me come and speak with the old man. Let the king decide what to do.
Witness U...
20 ditto each, at a span's height,
Witness ... -Nabû.
Concerning the star ... about which the king, our lord, wrote to us, is it really not visible to them? The plank bed which they are lying on is not visible to them.
The gods Aššur (and) Adad will listen to the prayers of a later prince when that wall becomes dilapidated and he rebuilds (it). May (the same prince) restore my clay cone to its place.
... of Šumma-ilani, at the disposal of Ninuayu.
1 seah 1 'litre' of spiced loaves; a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
... to the seed corn
... Enuma Anu Enlil
Palace of Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, descendant of Sennacherib, king of the world (and) king of Assyria, offspring of Sargon (II), king of the world (and) king of Assyria, chosen of the gods Aššur and Marduk, by the command of the gods Aššur and Marduk, in Nineveh, my royal city.
... years
... the palace herald
Disregard what they speak with their mouths, or what they think...
... to Nabû'a
After Mukin-zeri had set up camp against me, I was afraid of the king's wrath.
I struck down with the sword their magnates, together with Nabû-šuma-iškun, the son of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), who had fled from the chariots of silver and gold, the gold arrowheads, the gold daggers, and the gold bracelets that they had cast with their own hands, and (thereby) saved (their) lives.
An estate of 1 hectare ... ;
... he has become frightened
... I do not know. The king should not ...
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
Bel and Nabû ...
I have seen ... ; you ...
An estate of 3 decares adjoining Lubba-ana-ili;
May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May Aššur, Bel and Nabû give happiness and physical well-being to the king, my lord!
Witness Šarru-palu'a, royal bodyguard.
The Puqudu have given greetings to the fort. The Puqudu whom the king, our lord, ... , are servants of the king, our lord.
Bel-dan,
The month Adar (XII), the month of the festival of the Akitu House, the temple of the goddesses of the gods, my fathers, which is appropriate for the performance of the rites, the month in which the heart of the goddess Ištar, my lady, is soothed, the month in which the ... s are brought out to the Akitu House for the performance of the rites of the snake, the month in which the ... s are brought out to the Akitu House for the performance of the rites of the snake, the month in which the ... s are brought
If the moon becomes visible in Nisan (I) on the 30th day:
... Urmanu
... concerning the killing of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, and Assurbanipal, the crown prince of the Succession Palace
Witness Suhuru.
The chief haruspex of the Akkadians, who is the governor of Calah, is in Arbela. They should bring him out and bring him to Calah. What is it that the king, my lord, commands?
I have sent ...
He entered into it with all his forces.
As to those men about whom I wrote to you, if they have killed them, or if they have made them run away,
Witness Zarutî, chariot driver of the crown prince.
... my eyes
Witness Sin-uballiṭ, ...
Fingernail of Zer-sama', owner of the field, garden, threshing floor and house being sold.
... have been brought to me.
If Scorpius comes close to the front of the moon and stands there: the reign of the king will become long; the enemy will attack, but his downfall will take place.
I had a palace of elephant ivory, ebony, boxwood, musukkannu-wood, cedar, cypress, juniper, and terebinth, (a palace that I named) Egalzagdinutukua (“The Palace Without a Rival”), constructed thereon as my royal residence. I invited inside it the god Aššur, the great lord, and the gods who dwell in Assyria, then I made splendid offerings before them (and) presented (them) with my gifts. I brought to it the booty of
not yet ...
... river
... before the city gate of ...
Total, in the estate of 2 ... s of camel, in cultivation, in the town of Samanu.
Does your great divinity know it? Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Witness Ilumma-le'i, cohort commander.
... his ... and the people ... he made. He built a new temple for the god Bēl (Marduk) inside the city Baltil (Aššur) and he named it Egišlamšaršar. He made the gods Sîn, Šamaš, Nabû, and Marduk, Ninkura, and Tammuz, the gods who dwell there, enter inside it.
If the earth quakes all day: dispersal of the land.
The 'station' is present. The 'path' on the left ...
they go ...
... who ...
... Babylon ...
From Nabû-belu-ka''in.
The silver which the prefects of the village managers, who have been collecting it on the people of the country, is 2 talents and 18 minas of silver by the (mina) of Carchemish. My messenger has taken 1/2 shekel of gold, 3 tunics and 3 linen garments from the king's messenger.
(As for) Ḫanūnu of the city Gaza, he became frightened by my mighty weapons and fled to Egypt. I conquered the city Gaza, his royal city. I carried off ... , gold, 800 talents of silver, people, together with their property, his wife, his sons, his daughters, ... , his possessions, his gods, ...
x+20 hectares of field in the village of Abi-... ,
From Zakir.
Shalmaneser, strong king, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I), strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Šamšī-Adad (V), king of the four quarters:
Witness NN.
or the king or the prince, or any human being at all, who is called by a name like this, or the Assyrians, or the Assyrian Ištar, or the prince who succeeds you, or any human being at all,
... Aššur-ila'i
Witness Puṭaya.
I shall throw the logs into the river. I will fetch and give them.
If the moon becomes visible on the 30th day: there will be frost, variant: rumor of the enemy.
Witness Nuranu. Danaya. Urda-...
Afterwards, Nabû-eṭir and NN ... for the review ...
x+16 ditto, of the port;
Month Adar (XII), 10th day, eponym year of Mar-larim.
On the 18th day the king goes down to the House of God. The king ... The chanter holds the whip in his left hand before the king. He places the water from the well of the star in the king's hand.
adjoining ...
... Babylon, which ...
or Mugallu ...
Witness Eriba-Adad.
Ditto by all the gods of Arbela!
By the command of the god Adad, my personal god, I marched to Mount Lebanon. I cut down cedar beams for the temple of the gods Anu and Adad, the great gods, my lords. I cut down cedar beams for the temple of the god Aššur, the father who had engendered me. I received tribute from Mount Lebanon, the entire mountain of ...
6 oxen ...
... the gods on it ...
... him
adjoining the field of Nabû-duru-uṣur,
Care of Kiṣir-Aššur, exorcist of the temple of Aššur.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. Good health to the king, my lord!
If in Shebat (XI) there is an earthquake: attack of the enemy, variant: of locusts.
One mina without a leader."
To the king, my lord: your servant Babu-šumu-iddina, from Calah. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
from Til-...
If a planet rises in Elul (VI): rising of business, thriving of grain.
At that time, the temple of the god Enlil, the lord of the lands, my lord, which a previous king had built — its walls had buckled, its bondings had become weak, and its superstructure was in danger of collapsing. I removed its dilapidated parts. I built (and) completed (it) from its foundations to its crenellations with the craft of the god Kulla. I raised its superstructure like a mountain.
1, Gurini;
I had a foundation inscription written in my name, the praise of the great lord, the god Marduk, the god who created me, (and) the deeds that I had done, placed before the god Aššur, the father who had created me, and the goddess Zarpanītu, the queen of the gods, the goddess of heaven.
I will receive ... , and ... the Akkadian ... , the Akkadian ... , the tablets, I will not write ...
... to the name
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the troops and horses of the magnates of Bit-Kari of Saparda will go out to collect a tribute of horses.
of Su...
his deputy.
If the earth quakes at night: worry for the land; the land will disappear.
Yatiʾ, the king who reveres the gods, the one who is assiduous towards their shrines, the one who is attentive to their rites, the one who is assiduous towards their sanctuaries, the one who is pious towards their sanctuaries, the one who is assiduous towards their shrines, the one who is pious towards their sanctuaries, the one who is assiduous towards their shrines, the one who is pious towards their sanctuaries, the one who is assiduous towards their shrines, the one who is pious towards
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... news of the land of Dada
I brought out the auxiliary forces and his combat troops who had come to the aid of the city Ursa (and) who had taken up positions on high ground, together with 30 talents of gold, 800 talents of silver, choice antimony, large blocks of alabaster, beds, chairs, (and) all kinds of possessions, as much as there were, and I counted (them) as booty. Moreover, I brought out his palace women, male singers, (and) female singers and I brought (them) to Nineveh, my capital city,
... the magnates
They have approached Nabû-zeru-ka''in, the mayor, the deputy of Nineveh.
Your servant Ana-Nabû-taklak: I would gladly die for the king of the universe, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: The land, the army, and the servants of the king, my lord, are well. May the watch of the king be very strong day and night!
Witness Ahunu.
I marched to the city Madaktu, his royal city. In a favorable month, (on) a propitious day, I inspected the site of the city and (then) I changed its former name and called it Nineveh.
Witness Nabû-ahu-uṣur, scribe.
Concerning the order that the king, my lord, gave me, it is very good. The king, my lord, has said:
He performs this ritual twice in its entirety in the land. He burns his seed.
If the gall bladder is overturned and lies in the cystic duct: the land will dwell in quiet.
Total 4 men for the runaways.
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-alik-pani. Good health to the king, my lord!
He has returned to Barhalza. In the hands of the messenger ...
If Adad thunders on the day of disappearance of the moon: ...
Month Tishri (VII), 22nd day, eponym year of Taklak-ana-šarri, governor of Nemed-Issar.
There are people who have taken away my field and my orchards. I have taken my people away from the well and made them drink water from a cistern. The gods have not left me. Let me go and seize the man, let me appoint a guard with me, and let me do justice.
Total 5 persons, exempted silver.
You shall not make common cause with Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, nor with his brothers, nor with his uncles, nor with his mother, nor with his friends, nor with any other person who may revolt against Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, nor with any other person who may side with him,
thus (speaks) your woman, your brothers, your sons and your daughters: "Let me be carried off like a lamb!"
Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
I myself took the lead of the wild bulls and marched about in triumphant fashion. I had the wild bulls that I had captured pulled along behind me like a string of beads. I had the wild bulls that I had captured pull along behind me like a string of beads.
11 1/2 shekels of silver for ... ;
May the mighty weapons of the prince, the heroic one, the warrior, the valiant one, the one who is assiduous towards the kings, be placed in the hands of Aššur-etel-ilāni, the god Marduk, the one who loves our kingship!
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
... Halle
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial audience gift from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
Now then the ... official
... of ...
The leftovers of silver ...
11 shekels of silver of ...
The king's sons will die of hunger.
Total, x+1 house.
1,
If the moon makes an eclipse in Tishri (VII): attack of a ruler, variant: of locusts.
1 cow of silver;
I crossed the Tigris, a dangerous river, ... and entered his land.
x, from the Sealand, sons of Yakin;
... I laid its foundation on top of the great wall of the citadel, which is called “The Wall Whose Brilliance Overwhelms Enemies,” and I secured its brickwork on top of a terrace that was 40 bricks thick. I raised its superstructure 99 courses of brick high. I built (and) completed it from its foundation(s) to its crenellations.
With my select bodyguard and my battle troops, I took the direct road against him. I pursued him on the peaks of the mountains and, on a high mountain, I felled him from his (own) chair. I cut off his head (and) I trampled upon his corpse with my feet. I ascended the mountain in pursuit of him and, in the midst of the battle, I had my bodyguard drink water from a water skin (lit. “a skin of water”) that was (filled) with blood and gore.
You shall not sin against Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, nor make common cause with anyone who sins against him, nor make common cause with anyone who is hostile to him, nor make common cause with anyone who is hostile to the gods and goddesses.
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
2 minas, of Nabû'a, goldsmith.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
his son of 3 spans,
Instead of their seals they impressed their fingernails.
(and whether) they will litigate and go to court.
Anu, the great gods, Šalimtu, Šalimtu-Nergal, Kubu, Kubu-Amurru, Ea-demiq, Adad, Šala, Tarabu, Nisaba, Nisaba-Nergal, Niru, Hurmiš, Gidgidu, Gidgidu-Nergal,
Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, prince who reveres him, the one who is assiduous towards his shrines, the one who is attentive to his great divinity, the one who is assiduous towards his sanctuaries, the one who is pious towards his great cult centers, the one who is attentive to his great cult centers, the one who is assiduous towards his shrines, the one who is pious towards his great cult centers, the one who is assiduous towards his shrines, the one who is pious towards his great cult centers
In Ab (V) ...
Dannaya, reporter.
Chief of accounts.
... Qibi-Bel ...
This is the ... of the judgment.
... Month Adar (XII), 22nd day, eponym year of ...
The 27th of Tammuz (IV) ... the 28th ...
... he returned
Silim-Ashur has contracted and bought it for 30 shekels of silver.
... the king ...
In the hands of my messenger ... to the king, my lord.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
The one who is present shall pay in full the debts that are due. He shall pay them in the presence of the king.
... x hundred sheep
As to the roof-beams about which the king wrote to me, 226 heavy-duty beams of the king's palace, 212 for the water-tank, ... , 110 for the ... s, 9 beams for the palace of Ekallate.
... is curled.
Will he survive and escape? Will he be saved and live on? Will Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, be troubled and angry?
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... Arrapha
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
NN has contracted and bought from Mušallim-...
On the 16th day they will be in Calah. They will perform the ... s and the ritual, and return.
To the king, my lord: your servant Issar-nadin-apli, the foreman of the scribes of Arbela. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû, Marduk, and Ištar of Arbela bless the king, my lord!
9 towns ...
Witness Nabû-...
Aššur-da''in-šarru, NN,
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
Statue of Naqīʾa ...
If it is acceptable to the king, my lord, the king should not be worried.
8 beams ... which in ... to ...
... threshing floor, 10 hectares of arable land,
This is from before Aššur.
On the first day of the month of Tammuz (IV), at the time of the morning offering and the evening offering, I did not see the moon at the zenith of the moon, nor did I see it at the zenith of the moon.
When he heard that ... , he became afraid. The king said to us: "Nabû-šumu-iškun and Ṣillaya are coming. They are coming to you to kill Urdu-Mullissi."
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: good for Akkad, bad for Elam and the Westland.
Month Iyyar (II), ... th day, eponym year of NN, governor of ...
... his ...
... he is alive. When he dies,
... who are present
Of ... the priests of the house of the cooks.
in my mouth ...
Witness Sukki-...
x farmers, 1 shepherd, x+x+106+x people.
If there is an eclipse in Sivan (III) on the 14th day and it rises in the east and sets in the west: the king will be angry with his city and his country; the king will be angry with his city and his country; there will be deaths in Sumer; the king will be angry with his city and his country; the son of the king will kill his brother; the son of the king will kill his father; the sun will set in the west; the throne of the king will be shaken; the king will not stand firm in the land; the son of the
... they will glaze the bricks.
they should listen to his ...
... their threshing floors
At that time, the shrines of the gods of Akkad, my father, became dilapidated and old. I cleared away the debris of the temple of the goddess Ištar, mistress of the lands, his lady, and I rebuilt the temple of Eanna, the pure abode, (and) I made (it) shine like daylight.
Witness Mannu-ki-ilu. Witness Husurayu.
Aplaya-tarihutu ...
Marduk-apla-iddina (II), son of Yakin
I decorated Emašmaš (and) Egašankalama with silver (and) gold, (and) filled (them) with splendor.
Afterwards, Teumman, the (very) image of a gallû-demon, sat on the throne of Urtaku in order to (re)assert his position as king. He (Teumman) disregarded the oath(s sworn) by the gods Nabû and Marduk, the gods who supported me, (and) he constantly sought out evil (deeds). He plundered the land Elam, the land of Urtaku, king of the land Elam, Kudurru, (and) Pariʾu, the sons of Urtaku
Witness Nargî.
Bel-dan,
4 sheep ... ;
x ... s, 1 seah of sesame oil,
He pours wine and ... into the vat, and the master of the banquet offers it, saying: “Make the name of his seed disappear, make the name of his seed disappear, and give me ... !”
(Property) of Qullabu, the prince who resides in Sippar, the lord of Babylon, ...
In the city Ṭurušpâ, his (Urtaku’s) city, I captured him (Urtaku) alive and bound him with a bear. I flayed him in the squares of Ṭurušpâ.
Witness NN, ša šēpi guard.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
Ashurnasirpal, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of the deities, (and) the one who made the two shekels of silver shine:
Disregard that you, the haruspex my lord, have seen fear and terror at night...
Witness Aššur-aplu-iddina. Witness Ubru-Na'id, oil-presser.
... ;
I had a bridge constructed opposite the Citadel Gate with paving stones of white limestone and I named it “The Palace of the Entrance of the Mountain.” I had a canebreak tree, a plant of the steppe, grown on it and I filled the area between the gates with silver and copper. I had a replica of the ziggurrat of the god Aššur, my lord, which I had built in the lands of the enemy, made opposite the gate with limestone and I named it “The Palace of the Entrance of the Steppe.”
The 26th day: joy of heart.
30 ditto ditto ... , at the disposal of ...
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhe, conscript.
... s, seed corn in the cultivated field
With the strength of my heart, I advanced against the city Cutha. I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the city. I brought out of it horses, archers, Elamite, Aramean, (and) Chaldean soldiers, together with Nergal-naṣir, along with the citizens of the city, and I counted (them) as booty.
Witness NN.
5 minas of silver by the (mina) of Carchemish belonging to Nergal-šarru-uṣur, at the disposal of Nabû-šumu-iddina, son of Nabû-ra'im-ketti, scribe of the governor of Dur-Šarruken.
“... Ištar ... ”
Mannu-zeri,
6 bags of (mixed) kernels.
Bel-dan,
A cloudbank lies to the south.
Nabû-ušabši ...
Total: 3 seahs of bread, 1 seah 8 'litres' of beer.
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Whoever lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Dari-abu'a or his sons, grandsons, brothers or nephews, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Tabni-Issar, his sons and grandsons, shall pay 2 minas of silver.
Speak with Ardaya, the city overseer, and Issar-nadin-apli, the scribe, about this matter. He has been treated in this way, and he and Aplaya, the eunuch, ... , saying: "Issar-nadin-apli, the scribe, and Nabû-eṭir have spoken like this to Sasî: 'Why have you been treated in this way?'
Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, marched about victoriously in mighty mountains and valleys, (and) had a strong throne made of elephant ivory, ebony, (and) boxwood made inside them. (v 10) He had two lions made of elephant ivory, ebony, (and) boxwood, which were clad with silver, (and) which stood upon lion colossi, and he set (them) upon it. He had two chariots made with skillful craftsmanship and had
Total: food master ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Kiṣir-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord!
Ninurta-ilaya,
... Calah
... city god
... upon them
Egišlamšaršar: “House where the rites of the god are performed.”
To the god Adad, canal inspector of heaven and underworld, lord of the awe-inspiring gods, whose wrath is unrelenting, whose fierce attack is unrivalled, who dwells in the shrine of the god Kittu, the exalted one, the one who makes the rains pour, the one who opens the springs, the one who makes the crops grow, the one who makes the fields luxuriant, the one who makes the pasture land flourish, the one who makes the orchards fruitful, the one who makes the meadows lux
Concerning what the king wrote to me: "Why did you gaze at the sky? I have not seen (anything)." — I did not gaze at the sky, I was looking at the earth.
... the creation of ...
And this is the truth: They have cut down the tree where he was standing, and he has died. But they have not told me anything specific about him. Let him come here, and let him come to the Palace of the king.
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Palace of Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, son of Sennacherib, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, descendant of the king who preceded him — with the support of the gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Nabû, Marduk, Ištar of Nineveh, Ištar of Arbela, the great gods, his lords
1 woman, ... ;
... have come down
I have brought 90 men from the town Isitu into the town Ezirtu, and have settled 30 men there. The remaining x men I have settled in ...
with ...
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 21st day, eponym year of Dadî, treasurer.
Now then the messenger who gave him the message, saying: "Let him go to Nikkal-iddin! Do not fear Esarhaddon!" — he sat on the throne and he saw the message.
... the goddess Tašmētu, the god ... , the great queen ... , the one who makes him (the god Marduk) rise and who makes him sit ... , the one who makes the foundation of the throne of the king of the four quarters firm, the one who makes the great gods ... , the one who (re)constructed Esagil and Babylon, ... , the one who makes all the cult centers (and) sanctuaries shine, the one who makes the regular offerings abundant, the one who makes the pure purification rites perfect, the one who makes the great
The king performs the regular sheep offerings. One ox, six sheep for Aššur; one sheep, one stone (for) Šerua; two stones (for) the Enlil and Dagan; three stones (for) the Judges of the Dais of Destinies; two stones (for) the Enlil and Dagan of the House of Aššur; two stones (for) ... ; four stones (for) ... ; one stone (for) ... ; one stone (for) ... ;
The city and the temples of the king, my lord, are well. I am keeping the watch of the king, my lord.
at the disposal of Ubru-Nabû, ...
Bar-dî has contracted and bought it from Bel-šarru-uṣur for 5 1/2 minas of silver by the mina of the king.
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
Witness Bel-ṣalli.
Suri-abu, shepherd; 1 son; 1 woman; 168 sheep in the village of Suriba.
The king, my lord, should perform the ritual.
2 ... the chief ...
... the xth day;
The ... servant of Nabû-šallim-ahhe said to me as follows: "When the king returns from Nineveh to Calah, the eunuchs will return to the barley rations. The cupbearer will return to the barley rations too, and he will be dressed in purple and gold for two days. He will be dressed in purple and gold and go out with the royal entourage."
As to what my lord wrote to me: "... ; if ... , ... the bricks ... ; there is a very big ... in it. If I hear that the king is coming to Der, I shall go and bring the city into order. I shall place all the ... s that are there in it, and all the water that is there, too."
If Adad shouts on a day without clouds: there will be darkness in the land.
With Bel and Nabû, who give the king of the lands, my lord, the best of health, and with your servants who have served you in the past, who have not changed their minds in three years, and who have delivered the king, my lord, into the king's hands, saying: "He is in the presence of the king, my lord" —
Palace of Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria.
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me, ...
(Property) of the palace of ... of Nineveh.
... I had a bridge constructed opposite the Citadel Gate with paving stones of white limestone for the passage of wheeled traffic.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
as ...
I took the city Elenzaš as a royal city and a fortress for that district, and (then) I changed its former name and
The brewers take 9 seahs of barley for beer, including that for the huzirina-rites before the Image.
future prince who ...
I had the beams for the stronghold made of cedar, cypress, juniper, and terebinth. I roofed the stronghold with beams of cedar, cypress, juniper, and terebinth.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
... scholar
Iyyar (II), Sivan (III), Tammuz (IV), Elul (VI), Tishri (VII), these five days the moon will not be seen with the sun.
Witness Mutakkil-Marduk, scribe.
... he will make his eyes clear
Now the gods of the king, my lord, have made the Karallaeans do this to me.
to ...
The ... s who are in ...
x minas of silver belonging to Lu-ki-iddina, at the disposal of Dannî.
Witness Šulmu-beli. Witness Su'a, from Calah.
and he will be in his heart.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether, (should) Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, appoint the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the position which is written in this papyrus,
100 (tablets of) undecided matters, not checked, not collated, not written according to the original, not translated.
... the fort
... Whoever erases my inscribed name and writes his (own) name ...
We went to the Palace ... and brought out the ... of the rear ...
... Hurdanu to the palace ...
If the sun stands in the halo of the moon: there will be truth in the land; the son will speak the truth with his father; universal peace.
... , Tattî, and his people,
By the gods of the king, I have not written anything in this papyrus.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty, or (that) the oracle query has become jumbled in my mouth...
Witness Itti-Adad-ahhutu, servant of the vizier.
... I wrote to him
shall give 10 minas of silver and one mina of gold, and shall return the money tenfold to its owner. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
He died in his eponymy. His whole country rejoiced.
... Witness Inurta-šarru-uṣur.
... to the watch
If the moon reaches the sun and follows it closely: there will be a flood.
Witness Nabû-šezib.
... fish ...
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
x+7 ... , 19 ... , 1 bed;
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, ditto of the crown prince.
... to the river
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
The money is paid completely. That house, threshing floor, ... and well are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The barber ...
... we have opened it up and ... ed it.
... have been stationed against ...
x reinforced lower garments, ditto, ditto, ... ;
The city of the royal well. The city of Kar-Harran.
... Nabû in Babylon, and ... in the canebreak.
Should Assurbanipal, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, appoint the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the priesthood of the temple of Marduk?
The lackeys bring the iron utensils and the iron tongs and place them in your hand. He swings the purification device over you, comes and swings it over you again. He swings the purification device over the door and comes and swings it over you again. He swings the purification device over the door-jamb and comes and swings it over you again. He swings the purification device over the door-jamb and comes and swings it over you again. He swings the purification device over the door and comes and swings it over you again.
Zeru-ukin, Nergal-šarru-uṣur, Hannî,
The people of all lands bless you, O king, my lord. You are the one who has made the temple of the kings, all the cult centres, safe under your feet and has provided for your cult centres. Your gods love you as you are. I pray every day to Aššur for the life of the king, my lord, and for the opening of your gates.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šarru-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
... they did not agree
... on account of it he went to the city ... Liphur-Bel ... Muqinni-Aššur and NN ...
Let me write to the king, my lord, that he may be well.
... not yet
... horses will come.
he has taken ...
These five months I have been waiting for the news of the king, my lord, and now Bel and Nabû have completed the series in the library of Calah.
... in the lower earth, without ... , the king's great ...
... 4 ... s
a ditto of quinces;
... I exempted them from labour and corvée service and ...
... to one
3 sons of Nabû-zeru-lešir;
Mars became visible in the path of the Enlil stars. It will be faint, but I have seen it. I have written to the king, my lord, as soon as I have seen it.
... he will reach ...
9 (cuts of) meat, the New Palace;
So that the construction of my palace might be carried out correctly and that my handiwork be completed, at that time, the god Aššur and the goddess Ištar, who love my priestly service (and) who selected me (lit. “who called my name”), revealed to me a source of trunks of cedar, which since distant days grew thick as they stood in seclusion in the Sirāra mountain range.
The 'station' is present. The 'paths' are 2, the lower one is white and speckled. The 'well-being' is present...
Iranzu of the land Mannea heard about the might of the hero Aššur, my lord, that he had done battle with in the mountains, and fear of Aššur, my lord, overwhelmed him. He came to Dur-Tukulti-apil-Ekur, which is ... , before me and kissed my feet. I received from him ... horses, mules, oxen, and sheep and goats ...
1/2 mina of silver by the (mina) of the king belonging to Šamaš-dalâ, at the disposal of Mannu-ki-Ninua.
... the elders ...
... my ...
I have now written to you from my house. Do not be negligent with me, do not take my feet away from the ground!
... who ...
Barsipitu wrote to me through the royal deputy: "Why did you kill ... ?"
May Zeru-ibni, the creator of the name and the seed of the name and the seed of the seed, destroy your name and your seed from the land.
... the town of the treasurer
40 ditto, of the country;
Lu-ahu'a, the Bit-Hambanite, and Ahiqar, the Bit-Sinnean, have come to me on account of Bel-emuranni. They have spoken to me as follows: "Come, and let all the men who are with you come. What is it that you did to Bit-Hamban? Why did they not come with the Elamites? You are our witnesses."
... ;
4 homers of wheat belonging to Bahianu, at the disposal of La-amašši-Bel.
adjoining the house of Luqu, ...
I set up my stele (and) my inscribed object in the city Kilizi, the city of Assur, which I had conquered. I placed a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over it.
x shekels, ditto, ditto, by the mina of Aššur-ayu;
Indabibi, who sat on the throne of the land Elam after Tammarītu, saw the might of my weapons that had previously prevailed over the land Elam and (as for) the Assyrians whom I had sent to aid Nabû-bēl-šumāti, son of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), who had come to the aid of the land Elam, he (Indabibi) mustered his troops and took the road to Egypt. With the help of Nabû-b
12 minas of silver, capital, belonging to Šamaš-abu'a, horse trainer,
A fog portends Jupiter and Orion.
The gods who come out with Aššur to the house of Dagan.
Tukulti-Ninurta, king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II), king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dān (II) (who was) also king of Assyria:
To the king, my lord: your servant Nashir-Bel. Good health to the king, my lord!
... Kalbi-Ukû
Nabû-hil-lešir;
6 blankets, a bed ... ;
I made the extensive land of Sumer and Akkad bow down at the feet of the god Adad. By the command of the god Aššur, the great lord, my lord, I marched about victoriously against the enemy. With the weapons of the god Aššur, my lord, and my fierce battle array, I fought with them and defeated them. I took away from them their camp(s), their equipment, their implements of war, (and) their weapons.
... of the major-domo of the crown prince.
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of Assyria, unrivalled king, pious shepherd who revere the great gods, guardian of truth who loves justice, renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the insubmissive, (and) the one who strikes enemies with lightning:
I put to the sword the population of the city Ḫirimmu, a dangerous enemy, and I did not spare a single one. I captured alive the Yasubigallians, a dangerous enemy, and I counted (them) as booty.
1/2 mina 3/4 mina ... with 2 star-shaped ornaments ... ;
Bel-dan,
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
I built a house for the god Aššur, my lord, which is inside the palace, which is inside the city Aššur, which is inside the district of the city Aššur, which is inside the district of the city Šarru-nādin-aḫḫē, which is inside the district of the city Tīl-Aššur, which is inside the district of the city Šarru-nādin-aḫḫē, which is inside the district of the city Šarru-nādin-aḫḫē, which
I shall go and see how the work is progressing in Dur-Šarruken.
Amat-šumu-ibni,
If in Nisan (I) the sun rises and its light is yellow: the land will dwell in quiet.
(               Break               )
... the goddess Gula, who ...
Concerning what you wrote to me through your emissaries:
... the goddess Ištar
to ...
The king has heard ...
To the 'farmer,' our lord: your servants Adad-šumu-uṣur and Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health to our lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless our lord!
... ;
From Ašaredu.
Witness Balasî.
The king, my lord, told me: "You should return and give me 40,000 barley rations until I come."
(As for) ... , the one who had plundered and taken away as booty a substantial tribute of silver, he (Nabû-šuma-iškun) destroyed the city Uššû, his (own) city, and turned (it) into ruins.
I have written ...
In the future, in far-off days, may a future prince, when that temple becomes old and dilapidated, restore it. May he anoint with oil my monumental inscriptions, make sacrifices, (and) return (them) to their places. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
... the Gambulians
Witness Adad-aplu-iddina.
... they should not pull out
... bread and honey ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
I had a wall built around it (the city) and I named it Kār-Dūr-Šarrukīn. I had forty-five towers built and I named them after the mountains. I built (and) completed (it) from top to bottom with large limestone (blocks and) I deposited my monumental inscriptions.
... Il-yada' ...
... Let the king ask Lu-šakin
In the middle of the sun, which he held in his hand, Adad thundered in the east.
... their ...
At that time, the lands of the land Ḫatti, which had rebelled against me, ...
in all x persons, servants of these gentlemen —
saying: "... s to the king
he took ...
Sphinxes of alabaster, as well as sphinxes of cast urudû-copper that were overlaid with zaḫalû-silver, and sphinxes of cast ... -metal, (together with) columns of ebony, cypress, cedar, juniper, and elammaku-wood, and (together with) slabs of breccia, as well as slabs of pendû-stone, whose appearance is as finely granulated as cucumber seeds, and whose scent is as sweet as the scent of apples
... upon it ...
... with my stele ...
in Arbela.
... The coils of the colon are 16 in number...
As to what you wrote to me: "The king of Urarṭu and his troops are coming. Where are you going to take them?" —
This is a month when the whole world has been made happy. The gods have come out and taken up residence in their abodes. May the god Marduk, the god who created me, look upon my good deeds with pleasure and may he make all the lands bow down at my feet.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-bani-ahhe. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I, Bālālu, king of Tyre, Menasu, king of Yadi, Qašme, king of Udummu, Muṣurī, king of Moʾa, Ṣilli-Bēl, king of Ḫazittu, Mitinti-kitti-šarrā, king of Ashkelon, Milki-ašapša, king of Byblos, Mattan-Baʾal, king of Samsimuruna, Būdūr-il, king of Bīt-Ammon
To the king, our lord: your servants Nabû-ra'im-nišešu (and) Salamanu. Good health to the king, our lord! May Nabû (and) Marduk bless the king, our lord!
