I surrounded (and) conquered those cities. I rode on horseback and had my personal chariot dragged behind (me) on (lit. “under”) difficult mountain terrain.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
11 shekels of silver of Ištar of Nineveh, of Šep-Issar, ...
5 minas 6 shekels of silver, interest of the city of Carchemish, belonging to Bīt-Iaū-Ešši, at the disposal of Šep-Aššur.
... salt ...
What ...
... Uruk
... Now then ...
Total, of the estate of 10 hectares ...
The king, my lord, should give sheep to the gods; if he does not, he will be killed. They are very powerful.
Witness Barruqu, chariot driver.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
2 necklace ... ;
Witness Urdu-Nabû, scribe.
... with men, horses, and an army as great as he wishes, should go ...
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
The very best of health to the king, my lord!
... 1 litre 1 'litre' for the flour ... ;
If its horns are very pointed: the flood will come.
If Nergal wears a crown: the weapon which in ... will not have an equal. The evil which is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity ...
4 horses from Mannea, in the treasurer's household;
40 hectares of field in the town of Andillu; Sinqi-Issar, farmer, and his people;
Month Adar (XII), 21st day, eponym year of Bel-šarrani, governor of Kurbail.
... -šulmu, ...
Ahu-nagi ...
... he has committed a crime
... , ... il-... , 1 vineyard with 3 hectares of land ... ;
The evil which is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity — may it be expelled from the land and may I see (it) no more!
Ditto by Nabû, Nusku, Uraš and Nergal!
Inurta-ila'i has contracted and bought from Šer-idri for x minas of silver.
He enters the qirsu and goes straight to the qirsu. He sets the table before the god. He places a censer and a torch to the right of the god. He places a censer and a torch to the left. He strews incense twice before the god. He places a kamanu-cake on the table. He strews incense twice and pours beer and wine into the qirsu.
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether NN or his sons or his grandsons, comes forward and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against NN, his son,
Witness Mannu-ki-Libbali, scribe.
... the upper and the lower part were equal ... the sky shone, and the earth quaked. The wind blew. The god Nabû, the exalted lord, looked at the people with a joyful face and made (them) dwell in a happy city, the city Ṣi(i)ṣir, which is in the district of the city Raṣappa.
Is it pleasing to your great divinity?
If Jupiter becomes steady in the morning: enemy kings will be reconciled.
... Irra-Aššur
... a bowl (of wine):
10 shekels of silver, capital, belonging to Edu-šallim, at the disposal of Eriba-Adad.
Witness Sakkî, porter.
... the life of the city Uṣû ... I made enter. (vii 10') ... I made the people living in ... like the base of a mountain ... the gods ... I established there. (vii 15') ... I imposed upon them annual tribute payment ... I brought to Nineveh, my capital city. (vii 20') I imposed upon them payment like that of the gods ... I imposed upon them yearly payment.
This is the later (consignment) ...
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
The women about whom the king, my lord, spoke — we shall feed them in the storehouses, and they will be very well. If it is acceptable to the king, they should be settled in the same way as one sheep.
... horse(s) ...
(As for) Gyges, the king of the land Lydia, who resides in a remote place, a difficult path, (vii 10) the mention of the name of a king, my father, (and) the mention of his own name were unknown to him. (vii 15) By the command of (the god) Aššur (and) the goddess Bānu, on this very day, he sent his mounted messenger to inquire about my well-being.
Husaza, gardener; 3 sons; 3 women; 4 ... ; 1 hectare of field; 1 house; ... ; 1 vineyard in Inanna near ... ; in all, belonging to Hanatî.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Witness Šarru-emuranni.
(As for) the rest of his magnates, including Nabû-šuma-iškun, a son of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), who had fled from my weapons during my first campaign, ... they (the gods) remembered his (Nabû-šuma-iškun’s) sin(s) and imposed a heavy punishment upon him.
The money is paid completely.
May they give long days, everlasting years, well-being and joy to the king, my lord.
These two years, the enemy and the Babylonians have not attacked your house. What is it that they are saying now about the servant of his lord's house?
(As for) Uallî, ... , fear fell upon him and ... After Uallî, his son, had ascended his (Uallî’s) throne, he (Uallî) ... the deities Aššur, Mullissu, ... , Ištar of Nineveh, ... the great gods, my lords, and he committed a crime for which there was no return. He sent (messages) of peace to Erisinni, his heir designate, and he sent him to Nineveh.
If a planet becomes visible in Inurta: the flood will come.
Bel-ahu-... , chariot owner;
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Bariki or Abail or their sons or grandsons or brothers or nephews or governor, or any relative of theirs, or ... , or any relative of theirs, or ... ,
A tablet of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, to Tammaritu, king of Elam: I am well; you can be glad.
Month Tebet (X), 25th day, eponym year of Dadi-nuri.
I shall set out now ...
... he ...
2 ... s of the woman ... ;
The heaven without a net is Arbela!
... -rahimu
Total, 4 seahs each.
If the moon and sun are in balance: reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the world will make the throne last long.
... and because of that
The lord, who in his wrath ... ,
Abdâ, shepherd; ... ; ... ;
All this is the king's ...
... servant of NN —
If the sun rises in a cloudbank: the king will become furious and raise his weapons.
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract, whether Asî or his sons or his grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Tarhundapî,
If Aššur rises and the Plough star is bright: attack of weapons of Akkad; the bright Plough star is the great lord Pabilsag.
Afterwards, when Zerutisu had made peace with Bel-iqiša, his son, whom Bunanu had sent to ... , and had received barley and straw, ... , and his message, Zerutisu ...
... over the head and the left side of the house ...
x, governors;
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Concerning the ...
Witness Nabû-...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Arbayu or his brothers or his nephews or any relative of his, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Ninuayu and his brothers,
all ...
60 hectares of field in Dur-Nanaya; Dadî, farmer, and his people;
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šarru-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! The land of the king my lord is well.
I gave orders ...
... the king, my lord ...
If on the 15th day the moon and sun are seen together: a strong enemy will raise his weapons against the land; the enemy will tear down the city gates.
Witness Se'-imme.
My enemies have plundered my father's house, taken away my flesh, and are  constantly sending me messages by every means.
saying: "Give bread to the temples!" And "give beer to the temples!" The temples of the king, my lord, are well. The gods Uraš and Belet-ili have granted life to the king, my lord, for ever.
... is dark
Witness Aplaya, ...
in the morning ...
Just as a female spring lamb gives birth to male spring lambs, so may you give birth to male and female spring lambs.
(Property) of Yabâ, queen of Tiglath-pileser (III), king of Assyria.
They are free from litigation.
Esarhaddon, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who provides for the god Enlil, the priest of the god Aššur, ... governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, ... the great goddess, the pious prince, the one who renovates the sanctuaries of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, the great lady, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of the goddess Ištar of Arbela, the one who is attentive to the
Month Tammuz (IV), ... th day, eponym year of Aššur-duru-uṣur.
Liphur-ilu,
After ...
(               Break               )
... is overturned.
... the Gurreans ...
Now, when the king says, "...
Three times I marched to the lands Nairi (and) conquered the extensive lands Nairi from Tummu to the land Daiēnu, the lands Ḫimua, Paiteru, and Ḫabḫu. I received tribute from the horses (and) mules they had.
... Aššur-šumu-ka''in
The messenger of the king of Elam ... ; I am bringing them to me from their letter.
My heart rejoiced and my face lit up. I inspected the cella of the god Enlil, the gods of the god Marduk.
... in the palace
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 7th day, eponym year of Bel-lu-dari, governor of Tillê.
The Tebilti River, a tempestuous flood (of water) which had flowed from distant days by the side of the palace (and) had shaken its base when its flood was in full spate:
Witness Nabû-dur-beliya.
To Sîn-kenu-uṣur:
Belet-ili is placed before him ...
... the singer intones:
I had statues of my royal majesty, which are overlaid with silver, gold, (and) copper, made through the craft of the deities Ninagal, Ninkura, (and) Nusku, (and) I set (them) up for the admiration of all of the people. I had the great gods, the gods who support me, dwell on (their) eternal dais(es).
of the people of my land ...
They told me: "Now then I am giving you the ... and ... "
The king knows that our adversary is not one who speaks with us. And we ourselves are not able to do anything. The king should appoint a man in his service who can tell the king about the news and who can appoint a bodyguard to guard his servant's house.
... him
In the area of the 'finger' a long design is drawn straight...
From the beginning of my reign until my seventeenth palû, (when) I defeated all together the (tribes) Ituʾu, Ruʾuʾa, Ḫamrānu, Luḫuʾatu, Nabatu, Ḫindaru, Ruʾuʾa, (and) Liʾtaʾu, (and) all of the Arameans on the banks of the Tigris, Euphrates, Surappu, (and) Uqnû Rivers, as far as the Upper (and) Lower Seas, I placed
Witness Tabalayu.
May the throne be stable; may I not fall into the hands of my enemies, O king!
NN, gate-guard;
The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
Concerning the ... about which Pan-Aššur-... said, I have inspected 32 ... s; those ...
Aplaya has contracted and bought them from their hands.
... before Marduk, the governor
The one who overwhelms the unsubmissive, the one who brings order to the disorder of the land, the one who hears the prayers of the great gods and gives justice to the wronged, the one who makes the guilty pay, the one who renders assistance, the one who goes to the aid of the weak, the one who opens paths for the poor, the one who makes the sick recover, the one who heals the wounded, the one who makes the lame rise, the one who makes the blind see, the one who restores the ruined, the one who makes the destroyed live, the one
Witness Mannu-... , ...
Monument of Aššur-mudammiq, governor of the land of the city Aššur, which Aššur-rēša-iši, king of Assyria, son of Mutakkil-Nusku, king of Assyria, son of Puzur-Aššur (III), (who was) also king of Assyria.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. The very  best of health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the  king, my lord! May Aššur, Bel, Nabû, Sin, Šamaš, Ninurta and Nergal guard the life of the king, my lord!
Afterwards, Uaiteʾ (Iautaʾ), his son, sat on his (Ḫamat-šarri’s) throne. He (Ḫamat-šarri’) saw the might of the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk) and Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Nusku, (and) Nergal, the great gods, my lords, and bowed down at my
The left (portion of the) 'outside' rides upon the right.
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 9th day, eponym year of Labasi, chief of trade (657).
I shall tell it to him, and he will listen.
The Puqudu, who had sent me messages repeatedly (about his desire) to do battle with me, saw the might of (the god) Aššur (and) the heroic deeds that I had done, and he became frightened. He sent his envoy to me to inquire about the well-being of the king of Egypt, whom he had cast off (and) whom he had not anointed with oil (or) made to put on a crown. He inquired about the well-being of (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar, saying:
The king, my lord, received the magnates whom the king had sent to the treasurer; ... the king
The deportees who came ...
The king, my lord, should have a look at the mighty ...
Seal of A... ,
I had a canopy of musukkannu-wood, a durable wood, (10) that is clad with silver (and) decorated with precious stones, (a canopy) that was the equal of the heavens, constructed over it (the palace). I installed therein the god Marduk, the great lord, the one who loves his (the king’s) priestly service, and (thus) secured his (the god Marduk’s) exalted dwelling.
1, Nabû-šarru-uṣur, governor of Nineveh;
... later ...
the women of Cutha ...
8 hectares, ditto, ditto.
All is very well with the watch; the ear has been healed. He has recovered completely and is now able to stand up.
x minas of silver
... to Damascus
Witness NN.
I sent a letter of peace to Necho and (then) made him fear my lordly majesty. I clothed him with purple (and) put a gold crown on his head. I fastened gold bracelets on his wrists and (thus) appeased his anger. I wrote my name on a tablet and gave (it) to him.
The king, my lord, can be glad indeed about the good water of the  Tigris River.
... these ...
We have been treated like criminals in the presence of the king, my lord. Wherever we have been stationed, we have been treated like this.
If the moon at its appearance wears a crown: the king will reach the highest rank; the land will dwell as if in pastures near the city.
Now then Hut-Daiâ, the ... , who took silver, gold, precious stones, and utensils worth gold and silver, as well as all kinds of good things without number, has sold all the ... s of the left and right for copper. He has sold them to the land of Sardis. I am not giving them to the king, my lord.
in the charge of Ahabû, commander-of-fifty ... of Akkullanu.
... people
Good health to the king, my lord!
The Pleiades will come close to the Yoke star (α Herculis) on the day of disappearance ... Venus stands in the Pleiades.
... he turned back
Witness Kubu-ila'i.
12 shields of silver, whose mountings are decorated with lion and wild bull heads;
As to the news of the district Nagīpu, they told me: Ašpa-bari has said to Kibibi-še: "The king of Ellipi has given the land to me. Sell the city to Marduk-šarru-uṣur, and let him settle your people there." But I said to him as follows: "I will not sell the land to him, but shall settle (people) there in accordance with the will of the people of the country."
(As for) Ummanaldašu (Ḫumban-ḫaltaš III), he flew away like a bird to the peak of a mountain and disappeared. I pursued him to the place where he was hiding and cut off his head. I placed (it) on the neck of Nabû-šuma-iškun, a (member) of the Qutu family, who had sided with him. (As for) Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, (my) hostile brother, who had gone to the land Elam with him, I brought
Witness Marduk-šarru-ibni, cohort commander.
1 house; 1/2 threshing-floor ...
2 tureens of bouillon;
an estate of 2 hectares of land adjoining the street;
Adad-ibni ...
3 iron pots, each of which are one seah (c. 200 litres);
Month ... , 19th day, eponym year of Marduk-šarru-uṣur.
Bel-uballiṭ, ... , his wife, a adolescent son, 2 daughters, a total of 5 persons,
Aššur-natkil.
Lions are on the river bank.
With the support of my great divinity, with which I gave you confidence,
... now
The base of the middle 'finger' of the lung is 'bound.'
They are free from encumbrances. The chief singer has the usufruct of six thirds of the ... , and the singer has the usufruct of the remaining one third.
10 ... ;
What is it that he commands?
Nabû-šumu-iddina ...
... me
The king's word to the commander-in-chief:
He swings the purification device, strews incense, and retires to the side room.
I had a stele made and engraved on it images of the gods (and) I set (it) up for the gods, my lords.
Witness Nabû'a.
Witness Šep-... , ...
Witness NN. Witness Ahatâ.
adjoining a street
x cubits long, a wide as one cubit,
Na'id-ilu, royal bodyguard, has brought (this) in Iyyar (II), on the 26th day.
Adad-le'i, prefect;
in ...
Witness ... -Adad, ...
A tablet of Bel-aha-iddin to Iddin-ahi, his father. Good health to my father! May Šamaš give you life!
He ordered the destruction of the land, and (then) he brought about its defeat.
Concerning the statues of the kings which are in Harran about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "They should be brought here in ... " — ... is coming in ... It is said as follows:
This is of ...
Afterwards ... will come ... and ... to you ...
In one ...
... I departed
The people of Aššur, my lord, rejoiced with them (the Assyrians), and the magnates and nobles of the city were jubilant. They brought to me their heavy audience gift(s) and kissed my feet. I said to them: “You are jubilant, but what have you done? You have not brought me your heavy audience gift(s) from Bit-Adini. (As for) you, stay in my good graces and I will give you my heavy audience gift(s).” I gave to them the magnates and nobles of the
(As for) Nabû-šuma-ēreš, the šandabakku (governor of Nippur) who did not honor (my) treaty, he suffered from dropsy, (that is) “full water.”
... of Ninurta ...
100 hectares of land ...
... one prefect for the royal corral and for the chief eunuch ... Daniya and Bel-... have said, and ...
Witness Il-qatar, royal bodyguard.
Copy of this letter which Naṣibi sent to Nabû-iqiša.
May they grant to the king, my lord, happiness and physical well-being forever!
I have not asked the Laueans, (but) I have asked the captives; they say ...
... very
The Taziru ...
By the gods of the king, my lord:
Marduk and Zarpanitu, the gods,
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract, whether these men or anyone else, or their cohort commander, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Nergal-allak,
... Kenî
The 11th day.
and his people, ... ,
News of the Urarṭian: the ... of the ... emissary of the Mannean ... oxen and sheep ... the Aramean ...
He shall pay in Tebet (X).
Thus (speaks) your own god, who loves your priesthood, who makes your dominion great, who makes your power surpass that of (all) kings, your fathers, and proclaims the greatness of your land, who has entrusted to you the destruction of all of your enemies, who has made you greater than all of the princes, your rivals, and has made your dominion greater than all of the kings, your fathers;
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
On the 5th day Aššur-belu-... came into my presence. He gave me the king's orders concerning ...
to ...
Witness NN, son of Bel-ali.
— Venus stands in Anunitu.
a cup of quinces;
If he appoints him, will he, while he holds his position, ... ?
I conquered from the source of the River Subnat to Mount Nikippa, ... , as far as Mount Urumuš, (and) I brought within the boundaries of my land (the territory stretching) from the passes of Mount Kirruru to the land Gilzānu, the city Ḫubuškia, (and) the land Zamua. I annexed to Assyria the land of the people Yazīnu, (which stretches) from the passes of Mount Zamua to the land Gilzānu.
... throne (land) adjoining Aššur-...
... them
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
1 ... of Tikkamuri,
A thigh, a shoulder, outer cuts;
When he enters the king's presence, they will do the same and go in and out twice. The king should have a look.
... decision of the king, my lord,
Tiglath-pileser, valiant man, the one who fashioned image(s) of deities, overthrew (them);
to ...
Barik-ili, the Sebetti, who fled from the Akitu temple to the people, has now come to the king, our lord. The king should question him.
Witness Sama.
... the governor of Harran
Witness NN, cohort commander.
a 2-seah jar of beer;
... I have examined. In the house ...
... -le'i
I said: "... ilka'u ...
From 34 children ...
... I in my turn
Ashur-belu-usur,
... the king should ...
Of the heart ...
Palace of Shalmaneser, great king, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), great king, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II) (who was) also great king, strong king, king of the universe (and) king of Assyria.
... the king, my lord
... Dur-Yakin — new
Concerning what you asked me: "...
... I rejoiced and ...
... the front red, of the country;
If Jupiter reaches Spica and passes it, and afterwards Spica reaches Jupiter and passes it, and afterwards Jupiter reaches Saturn and passes it, and afterwards Saturn reaches Upsilon and passes it, and afterwards Upsilon reaches the Distant Star (α Herculis) and passes it, and afterwards the Distant Star reaches the Raven Star (α Lyrae) and passes it, and afterwards the Raven Star reaches the Fish Star (α Taurus) and passes it, and afterwards the Fish Star reaches the Crown Star (α Auriga), and afterwards the Crown Star reaches the Distant Star (α
You ... the ...
... whom the king, my lord, has entrusted with the task of guarding the king's garrison troops of Assyria,
The king ... before the window ...
— On the 14th day the moon is seen with the sun.
of ... archers
Kubabu-ila'i, the king my lord's servant, is a criminal. He has committed a crime in Til-iqri and has been arrested. We are herewith sending him to the king, my lord.
until he himself ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Go and inspect the fort!" — I have inspected the fort on the other side of Egypt. It is very, very well.
450 silver objects, of the chief cupbearer, on a single stand;
The king goes straight to the palace.
For the god Sîn of heaven, lord of the gods, his lord:
All is very well with the crown prince. The work that was assigned to him has been delivered. He has gone 5/6 leagues. He has advanced 10 (leagues) more than he was supposed to advance.
Total 1,112. Month Iyyar (II), 29th day.
As to what the king, our lord, wrote to us: "...
... to guard ...
2 'litres' of midru-bread;
NN, ... ;
Now, let them come to me concerning the horses to be harnessed to my  brother's yoke."
... his people
... I shall bring
Seal of NN, owner of the women being sold.
Šamaš-eriba, servant of Hakkubu —
who surrounded ...
Witness ... -Adad.
I had gates opened up in it in four directions, in front and behind, (and) along both sides, for the entrance of the king of the world, their lord. I had (them) skillfully built and I named them “The Gates of the Abyss.”
... the reign of Sargon ... the reign of Sargon ...
In Kislev (IX), the 15th day, eponymy of Šulmu-šarri, governor of the city Ḫalzi-adbar (691).
Witness Nabû-le'i, ditto.
Witness Mannu-lu-šulmu.
He told me as follows: "The doors of the temple of Sîn, of the temple of Šamaš, and of Nikkal are to be plated with silver. I have been making them, but they are not finished. I shall finish them by the 1st of Tishri (VII)."
in ...
... tubes
The lands Bīt-Ḫamban, Sumurzu, Bīt-Barrû, Bīt-Zualzaš, (and) Bīt-Matti,
Addar (XII) is the harvest month; Sivan (III) ...
(Property) of Šurši-ilu, vice-regent of the god Aššur. Adad-šamšī-īškun, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Ilu-šūma, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Šalim-aḫum, (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur: property of the city Kār-Tukultī-Ninurta. Šerūa,
I had a palace of cypress, a replica of a palace of the Assyrian kings, (vi 1) which is called “The Palace Without a Rival,” constructed inside its (the city’s) wall. I had inscribed on it inscribed objects bearing my name (and) the praise of the god Adad. I had the names of the gods Enlil, Adad, Šamaš, (and) Šamaš-šumu-ukin, the god Enlil, the goddess Ereškigal, the goddess Šarrat-nip
The king, my lord, should know (this).
The silver shall increase two minas or three minas per mina of the (regular) price of Aššur and Mullissu, according to what Akkullanu has contracted and bought.
a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
... vineyard in Til-zanî; Mannî, gardener, and his people;
... exorcist(s)
x ... of field, 1 house, and a barn in the town of ... ;
who does not keep the treaty,
... ;
2 'litres' of midru-bread; 2 'litres' of spiced bread.
... the king, my lord, said
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
Alternatively, the king, my lord, may decide about these matters and write me.
In the charge of Šamaš-ibni.
On my eighth campaign, I marched against Dunānu, son of Bēl-iqīša, to the land Gambulu, which had put its trust in the king of the land Elam (and) had not bowed down to my yoke. (ii 10) I conquered the land Gambulu in its entirety. I destroyed the city Ša-pī-Bēl, his fortified city, whose location is situated between rivers.
Concerning the captives about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me,
An estate of x hectares adjoining the road to Ṣupat, adjoining Nabû-šezibanni, and adjoining  Nabû-... -iddina —
When the king, my lord, ...
Mugallu the Melidean ...
... 100
Witness Issar-šumu-iddina, scribe.
Ditto, ditto! May all the gods who are called by name in this treaty tablet break your bones and flay you like a skin-dish!
The king, my lord, must not say: "I have written to Belšunu, and I have mobilized troops. What have you done?"
Ištar, Ištar of the Kidmuri Gate, Ber and Tammuz:
The heart of the sheep is normal...
... Bel-šallim
Witness Gi... , ...
He who is present shall pay in full the silver amount. If he is not present, the silver shall increase by a third. He shall pay the field rent as it was before.
... bedroom
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Abi-yate', or his sons, grandsons, brothers or nephews, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Mannu-ki-Arbail, his sons and grandsons, shall place 10 minas of refined silver and 15 minas of pure gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Witness Na'id-Adad.
I carried off people and booty from the land Elam, which is in the territory of the gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Šarrat-Kidmuri, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, and Nergal. I added (them) to my gods. I divided up the archers, shield bearers, ... , (and) chariot fighters of my royal contingent (and) distributed (them) among my governors, my
... the woman ...
... in this manner ...
... of Nineveh ... he cut down ...
Witness Remut-ili.
The priest of the ziggurrat and the temples go (away).
... in the land of Akkad ...
... arrow
I have sent a report to the king, my lord, concerning the sheep offerings to the Inner City.
... king of the world, king of Assyria, ... the god Marduk, the goddess Zarpanītu, beloved of the god Nabû, the goddess Tašmētu, ... governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, son of Esarhaddon, ... king of Sumer and Akkad, ... whom ... made great, who is assiduous towards his sanctuaries, ... to kingship ...
... I asked him: "Is it ... ? Nabû-mušallim
... his sons
Nabû-pir'u-šagmash,
... to the king
Total, of Šulmu-ahhe, son of Uadi.
to ...
The chief ... and the call-up officers of Assyria have also come. Let the ... and the ... -men come into their presence.
Urda-Nabû has written a letter to Bel-eṭir and to Šamaš-zeru-iqiša.
When Nabû-eṭir-šamê, a šandabakku, ... ,
Witness Šar-Issar, ...
1 hand-ring of gold, 1 mina 4 1/2 shekels in weight; 1 arm-ring of gold, 1/3 mina 1/3 shekels in weight; 3 shekels, Šumma-Issaran, cohort commander;
At that time, I was mindful of his (Marduk’s) command(s) and I constantly sought out the gods Enlil, the gods of the god Marduk.
At that time, Eḫulḫul, the temple of the god Sîn that is inside the city Ḫarrān, which Shalmaneser (I), son of Ashurnasirpal (II), a king of the past, a forefather of mine, had built — that temple had become old and its walls had buckled. I removed its dilapidated section(s). I rebuilt (it) from top to bottom. I made its structure larger than the one in the days of the past.
owner of the ... being sold.
Witness NN, cohort commander.
I had inscribed on large limestone slabs (images of) the enemy settlements that I had conquered. I erected (them) in their gateways as an object of wonder.
... near...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you send me a letter from Bit-Barakki after I had sent you a letter from Bit-Nabû?" — on the 1st of Shebat (XI) I sent Bit-Barakki and Nabû-šumu-iddina to the king, my lord. And I sent the king, my lord, my messengers with them. And I sent my messengers with them to greet the king, my lord.
The mountains, rivers, (and) town of Duri are his palatial residence. Urakku ...
Does your great divinity know it? Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
1, Aplaya, palace herald;
... his ...
Review Palace of the New Corps;
... ;
The coils of the colon are 14 in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
a flagon of beer of bruised grain.
... the star of Karibtu
the wife of the Palace Manager;
... I made that palace beautiful. I had a stele made, had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the gods Aššur and Ninurta written on it, and I erected (it) in their (the palatial halls’) forecourt. I had the praise of my lordly majesty (and) the might of the god Aššur and the goddess Ninurta inscribed on it and I deposited (it) for future days.
... shall glaze the bricks.
From Ašaredu, son of Damqaya, servant of the king.
... in its entirety
Witness Adad-šumu-iškun, ...
Total, of the temple of Nabû, his priest.
... and in ...
The money is paid completely. That woman is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
x+34 horses,
they are inciting each other ...
Total, Aššur-matu-taqqin, village manager.
a total of 164 Kushite horses and 35 cavalry mounts, 6 mules —
... he lifted my ...
... the ... of the city came to me. His associates
... he said: "Nobody may take away from him ...
... the Urarṭian(s)
From Issar-šumu-ereš.
I have been looking for ...
... is on the left. The breast-bone is thick...
... ditto,
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord! The fort and the zakku are well. The king, my lord, can be glad.
On my return march, I defeated all together the Tuʾumuna, Riḫiḫu, Ubudu, Gibrê, Maliḫu, Gurumu, Ubulu, Damunu, Gambulu, Ḫindaru, Ruʾuʾa, Puqudu, Ḫamrānu, Ḫagarānu, Nabatu, (and) Liʾtaʾu, insubmissive Arameans.
of the king ...
Witness Adad-naṣir, ...
Taboo of Aššur, my god, (and) Sîn, who dwells in Ḫarrān.
... the king, my lord
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
Witness Nabû-...
... there is
The king's word to NN: I am well; you can be glad.
3 bags of sesame;
Witness Isanayu.
... to Marduk-aplu-iddina
NN and his people, ... ,
I, the vice-regent of the gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl and Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela, the creation of my father, the one who was chosen by the gods Šamaš and Adad, by the command of the gods Šamaš and Adad, I stood at the side of the people of Assyria, the great sons of my father, the offspring of my father’s house, and I gathered (them) together like sheep.
... he will die.
The day after tomorrow we shall make ... , and the ... which we shall do ...
... you have glazed bricks for my father's house ... , you have made the two sons of the lady on the mountain, in all five persons, lie on a bed, you have provided three blankets, a chair and a table.
Tab-shar-Ashur,
The halo of Cancer did not cover the moon, it passed by (and) went on.
Does your great divinity know it? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
On my eighth campaign, I marched against Dunānu, son of Bēl-iqīša, to the land Gambulu, which had put its trust in the king of the land Elam (and) had not bowed down to my yoke. I conquered the land Gambulu in its entirety. I surrounded, captured, (and) plundered the city Ša-pī-Bēl, his fortified city, which is on the banks of the Nabû River.
Witness NN, scribe.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
... enter ...
I conquered the city Adummatu, a fortified city, the residence of the Arabs, which Sennacherib, king of Assyria, my father, had conquered and plundered. (v 10) Hazael, the Aramean, fled with his substantial booty to Assyria and took refuge in Nineveh, my capital city. I pursued him and brought about his defeat. I conquered the gods Asalluḫi, Dāya, Nūḫa, Rūba, Abiri, Atarru, Quruqu, (
If the moon is eclipsed in Sivan (III): Adad will devastate.
If it is all right, ...
Dayyan-Inurta,
And I shall give orders to NN to bring whatever he holds back.
Witness Riba-ahhe.
Month of Ḫibur, eponymy of Šuma-iqbi, the Sebetti.
Month of Iyyar (II), 10th day, eponym year of NN.
Disregard what (happens) after my stipulated term...
From Balasî.
... they did and ... they cut down the tree of Aššur, my lord, ... in all the lands which they had conquered.
Now then I am writing to you: there are no ... people with you, no ... ; ... the governor
The Urarṭian shall not receive him, nor shall he be sold for money. The son of Ir-tukulti-Ninurta ...
May Nabû (and) Marduk bless the king, my lord! May they grant long days (and) full years to the king, my lord!
Zar-Issar, his son of 4 spans' height; ... ;
... his ...
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also king of Assyria: booty of the city Ruqūtu of Bīt-Adini.
... you did not ...
Total, x ... s assigned to Kiṣir-... , about whom the king spoke.
Witness Šumma-Adad. Witness Ahu-illika.
NN, son of Abi-haza, his brother, whom Na'id-ilu, the sheikh, son of Hata'u, had taken to Nippur and who had committed a crime in Babylon —
I brought back to Assyria 10 mules, 10 chariots, (and) the palace women of Kalḫu, 47,000 captives, male and female, the entire population of the land of Sūḫu, the lands Ḫindānu, Ḫittite, (and) Ḫatti,
Palace of Šamšī-Adad, son of Išme-Dagan (II) ...
Witness Šep-Issar, servant of the governor of Birtu.
... As to what you wrote: "When ... , they attacked me along with Marduk-šumu-... until I sent ... and ... " — I have written to the gods Aššur, Bēl (Marduk) and Nabû, my gods, as follows:
are placing ... upon them.
I received gold (and) shining silver sling straps as their wrist-trappings (lit. “fingers”) in (their) wholety (lit. “from their hands”). I took away gold (and) silver daggers as their waist-belts.
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, chariot driver.
... -ahhe
The coils of the colon are 16 in number.
... ṣipirtu textile,
I received the payment of Ianzû, the king of the land Naʾiri, in the city Ḫubuškia, his fortified city: six (of) three (bricks) high, ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , eight forts, including the cities in their environs, which belong to the land Tuāya, ... , the district of Kaltina, the land Andia, and ...
... fish ...
The lower part is elevated. The left of the gall bladder ...
a cup of quinces;
10 talents 15 minas of ... ;
— Jupiter stood there one month over its period.
x+1 cloaks, the front red, ... ;
The king of Akkad will become happy in the steppe; the mood of the heart of the troops will be good; the king will become happy.
NN, his son, of 3 spans,
3 ... ;
I gave the following order: "When the work of Uraš is finished and the temple of the goddess Mušammerat is completely built, you will perform the festival of Nanaya."
The 'strength' is absent.
I joyfully entered that palace, which is in Babylon, (and) opened its treasury. I carried off gold, silver, gold (and) silver utensils, precious stones, all kinds of possessions (and) property without number, a substantial treasure, (together with) his palace women, courtiers, attendants, all of the craftsmen, as many as there were, (and) his palace attendants, and I counted (them) as booty.
The king, my lord, should know (this). The Šubrian ...
They are mutually paid off.
And don't be negligent about your work!
The kundibšu-ritual which is performed in the evening is not suitable for performing. It was performed twice in its entirety, it is incomplete. The king, my lord, should know (this).
They are doing the work.
Sangû-Marduk, the lord of the temple, who had become hostile to me and had cast off the yoke of the king his lord, took fright at the clangor of battle and turned to the enemy and the enemy's lord. He grasped the feet of the goddess Ištar and the god Adad, the gods, lords of battle, and begged the king of the land Elam for help. And the king, the god Nabû, took the road in triumph and marched triumphantly through the land Elam.
After I had descended from Mount Uaia, I approached the district of Ianzû, king of the land Naʾiri. Ianzû, king of the land Naʾiri, came out from the city Ḫubuškia, his royal city, (and) kissed my feet. I received from him horses, oxen, and sheep and goats in the city Ḫubuškia, his royal city.
Witness Huhurapšu.
My battle troops (who were stationed) in the land Mangisu — which is inside (the territory of) the city Sumandir — ...
... to the king
... have seized
Now there are people who are running away to them. I am sending my servants to them, and if they are in my country, I shall send them in their hands, and if they have crossed the river, I shall pursue them.
The money is paid completely. That field is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The series, I did not write it down.
Zizî;
... he asked
An estate of 2 hectares of land adjoining Mannu-ki-Arbail, adjoining the field of Bel-lu-balaṭ,
From the 20th day of the month ...
... and I had (it) inscribed upon a bull colossus that ... I erected. I made (it) as bright as day. I had the god Šamaš, my lord, walk upon its ... I made (it) as bright as day.
... will be stored.
... ground ...
... and he/they ... ed the people ... and ... upon ...
If Venus disappears in Ab (V) from the 1st to the 30th day in the west: there will be rains; the harvest of the land will prosper.
Of the days of ...
(As for) NN, the eunuch of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, my lord, the one who had sinned against the treaty (and) oath(s sworn) by the king, my lord, he stood before me and beseeched my lordly majesty with supplications and prayers. He went to his palace and made the walls of my palace as strong as a fortress. He guarded the royal throne of mine like (another) king.
... gold rings for his servants
To the king, my lord: your servant Gabbu-ana-Aššur.
Kush,
The mighty ...
Witness ... ayate.
... his ... before the king of Babylon
1 seah 1 'litre' of regular offering loaves;
... he seized on account of Enlil and returned Išme-ilâ to his position.
Adad-hutni, farmer; 2 sons; 1 man; 1 woman; 1 daughter, of 6 spans' height: a total of 5 people.
adjoining the house of Bahianu, adjoining the house of Daniati-il,
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Month Iyyar (II), 5th day, eponym year of Gallulu.
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
“Should the troops ... to Ea?”
Witness Nabû-zeru-iqiša.
To the king, my lord: your servant Mannu-ki-Ninua. Good health to the king, my lord! The land of the king my lord is well.
From this very fact it is clear that it is favourable to go out tomorrow. We shall perform the ritual on the 7th day.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, (or) jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
... the former officials
... them.
20, his water-skin rafts;
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: good for Akkad, bad for Elam.
... of Aššur, my lord, who ... after ... and who ... to Aššur, my lord, with the support of Aššur, my lord, and the goddess Nergal, my god, ... for my life ... the one who provides for the shrines ... my lordly residence ... my gods ... the House of Aššur, the House of Šamaš ... I built.
May Ištar, the king, my lord, not ... the eyes of the king, my lord, ... the rest ...
The remaining (of the people) who were taken into the great temple of the city Kār-Tukultī-Ninurta.
When the god Marduk, the great lord, the one who loves my priesthood, commanded the renovation of the cult centers, he commanded the renovation of the cult centers of the gods Šamaš and Adad.
In the great depth of my heart I have been praying to the king, my lord, saying: "If there is a report about this ... , let the king, my lord, write to his servant that the king ... "
... I wrote to the king
We have selected the men and are transporting them to the king my lord's destination. We shall go and cut the logs into shape and bring them over.
From Inurta-kudurrī-uṣur, son of the king.
I marched to the city Melid, which is on the border of the land Ḫatti. I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the city Kannat. I returned safely to my land.
... ditto, 1/2 'litre' each;
... much ...
I bowed down to the yoke of the gods Aššur, Mullissu, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela, the great gods, my lords, who had encouraged me. I did not let those people live, I did not give them ... , (and) I did not allow them to live in peace. At that time, in that same year, I received a substantial audience gift from him and (thus) appeased my anger.
... from
Month of Iyyar (II), 10th day, eponym year of Aššur-killanni.
He is in my presence ...
Daltanu, ... ;
The king, my lord, has done a favour for the house of bricks belonging to the father of Nikkal. They are at home, in the house of bricks of Nikkal.
Witness Issar-taqi-ana-ili.
Nabu-eṭiranni,
Moreover, I had a palace, a replica of a Hittite palace, skillfully built on a terrace with white limestone and paving stones of white limestone for the processional way of the goddesses. I had the goddesses who go at my side (i 5') made to enter into their gates.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
... I am bringing the people to Assyria ...
Palace of Tiglath-pileser, king of the universe, king of Assyria: (this is) the booty of the bank of the River Ḫusir, of the city Nineveh.
105 (items): a silver agate, a ... , a ... , a ... , a jar of oil, 100 oxen, 10 homers of cedar, 10 homers of cypress, 10 homers of juniper, (and) 10 homers of haubaqqu-wood;
The middle of the 'station' is effaced ...
... ditto,
... Man-ki-šarri
... Ahu-duri
... of the 'path' is curled.
The chief of the mule express and the chief of the female mule express have not yet returned there; now, I should bring 30 houses there, and let the men of Nabû-ṣalli, the prefect of the cohort commanders, and one of the cohort commanders settle them in the city of Hirsama. They should settle them there, and let them give them fields and orchards there.
Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, has contracted and bought them from Issar-duri and Lu-šakin for 4 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
1 urnutu-garment, ditto, the edging ... , the front (red), of the port, 1 talent less than 2 talents;
Tab-shar-Ashur, son of Bel-iddina,
2 sheep, (and) a bowl (of wine):
Witness ... -abu-uṣur. Witness Abi-ram, city overseer.
Month Elul (VI), 13th day.
Now, the messengers of the son of Zeruia, who went to the king my lord's (harem) for the news, have come back to the city of Kisik.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "What are you doing?" The king, my lord, can be at ease.
I built (and) completed it from its foundations to its crenellations. I raised its superstructure 288 cubits above the surface of the water. I enlarged its structure 700 large cubits along (its) longer side (and) 163 large cubits along (its) shorter side. I made its site bigger than before, (and) extended its approach. I built anew the ziggurrat of the temple of the goddess Ištar, 443 large cubits along (its) longer side (and) 286 large
I have performed the sheep offerings of the fifth day before Aššur and the gods of the king, my lord. All of them have been slaughtered. On the fifth day ...
When I seized him and brought him to ... , he said to the king: "This is a matter of ... ; they have spoken a lie to him, and they have removed 3 minas of silver from him."
In the month of the tenth day, when the tax is collected, one torche of ... , for x shekels of silver, one torche of oil for 12 1/2 shekels of silver, and one torche of ... for 3 shekels of silver, are given.
... went
I carried off to Elam (and) Chaldea silver (and) gold, the property of the land of Sumer (and) Akkad, (and) of Šamaš-šuma-ukīn. I conquered the land Elam in its entirety (and) took away its royal treasure. Moreover, I brought to Assyria Šamaš-šuma-ukīn (and) his entire royal family, his palace women, (and) his entire court, (as well as) his chariots, his staffs, his implements of war, his palace furniture
The money is paid completely. Those fields, houses, threshing floors, orchards (and) wells are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
As to the merchants about whom my lord said: "They must not be detained!" — I have heard that they have been detained. They are 14 minas of silver. My lord should send word that they be released.
... 1/2 'litre';
I have put their ... between their eyes.
Witness NN, from Hatarate. Witness NN.
One chariot fighter, two cavalrymen, and three mounted scouts were killed.
... of the plundered ...
... to them ...
He brought before me (his) daughter, his own offspring, and the daughters of his brothers to serve as housekeepers. He sent (them) to Nineveh, my capital city, to (serve) as my slave(s). I received from him his daughter and the daughters of his brothers, together with a large marriage gift. I had mercy on him and (then) I gave (his) son, his offspring, back to him.
From Ašaredu the older.
... the king, our lord, ...
Their orchards ... Giri-Ba'al ... Three emissaries from the town of ... have come in with tribute.
... the path of the sun ...
Witness NN.
... the second vizier
At that time the Great Wall of my city Aššur and the wall of the outer city (Arbela) which kings, my ancestors, who preceded me had previously built — those walls had become dilapidated and I rebuilt them from top to bottom. I deposited my monumental inscriptions. I deposited the monumental inscriptions of the kings, my ancestors, together with my monumental inscriptions.
... tablets not ...
adjoining the field of Šulmu-beli, son of NN,
... ditto,
An estate of 4 decares ... ,
Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, chosen of the god Aššur, vice-regent of the god Aššur, beloved of the gods Anu and Enlil, whom the god Aššur and the great gods made greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises, and whose dominion the god Aššur has made greater than (those of) all kings of the lands; son of Shalmaneser (I), king of Assyria, son
To the king, my lord: your servant Bel-eriba. Good health to the king, my lord!
... ;
... , the Arraphean; Ea-šarru, Belet-ili, Babu, Enlil, Adad, Šala, Sin, Nikkal, the Image of the King, Šakkan, Šarrat-eqi, the Lions, the Storm-birds, the Bulls, the Winged Birds,
to Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, ...
Witness Šulmu-šarri.
1 bag of sesame; 6 ditto of kernels.
These five months ...
Witness Tuqunu-eriš. Witness Adî, merchant.
I delineated its area (and) measured it. I piled up (earth) as high as a mountain. I dug out a canal from the Ḫusur River and directed its outflow. I made (it) 340 cubits long, 288 cubits wide, (and) 166 cubits deep. I made (it) 176 cubits long, 266 cubits wide, (and) 196 cubits deep. I made (it) 196 cubits long, 288 cub
Witness Banî, deputy of the chief physician.
eponym year of Arbailayu, chief treasurer.
Witness Dugul-la-tešê-lešir. Witness Nabû-nadin-ahi.
... and
... has been erased
Witness Mannu-ki-Aššur, ditto.
he took counsel with himself ...
... I have heard
20 minas NN, merchant ...
If a cow gives birth to three (young): the land will change.
... without
161 cavalrymen, 130 grooms, 52 lancers, in all 343 —
a 2-seah jar of Assyrian budê-confection;
... rubbed;
... my chariot in the midst of battle
... my citizen Babylonian(s)
... 'litres' of beer;
total, 2: land of Raṣappa.
... to the king
... my land
I asked ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
I restored the ... of the city Dūr-Šamaš-rēša-uṣur (and) wrote my name.
... houses in Calah, the palace
... from Elam
... wine for the days ...
1 large gold sword, whose weight is 26 1/3 minas of gold;
After the letter of the king had come to me, I wrote to the king (again): "I will not let him go out, and the king must not put the blame on his servant."
... &  beer  &  Ahu-lurši
Moreover, breccia, as much as is needed (for making) burzigallu-bowls, (a stone) that had never been seen before, (vi 10) revealed itself at Kapridargilâ (“Dargilâ Village”).
This is the rest of the (explanation) of the letter.
Witness Nanî, ditto of Nabû.
May a later prince restore it (and) return my inscribed name to its place. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
or a ... , or a bowman, or a lamentation priest, or a weaver,
Total, of the chariot-horse-trainers.
... which ...
... will glaze bricks ...
These are the waters which Baal-ahhe-eriba has drawn for his city and the town of Dugri in the district of the land Pillatu, and in the cities of the border of Assyria opposite the Upper Sea and in the city Gullu of Chaldea.
all my towns ...
Witness Kunaya, eunuch of ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Issar-šumu-ereš. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I asked the elders of the land Bīt-Barakka, who live in the high mountains of the land Tīl-Ašurri, (about) the people of the land Meluḫḫa, who had been sold to the land of the people of the Amurru. They told me the following:
adjoining the field of Nabû-šapik-zeri, adjoining Ammini-il, adjoining Abi-ṭab, adjoining the road to Issete, adjoining the mountain, adjoining the field of Abi-ṭab,
1 hectare 1 decare, road of Qumbate, adjoining Qumaya, the road of Qumbate, and the ... of Kar-Apladad;
Land of the Bit-Ammonites
2 seahs, the 21st day;
of the palace herald.
... will be placed there.
The servants of Bel-ahhe-riba who came here have appealed to the king, my lord, saying: "Our brothers are in Na... Nergal-ša-... , the royal bodyguard whom the king, my lord, sent with them, has ... ed these ... s of ... "
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Bīt-Zabidaya, Uruk, Eridu, Kullab, Kissik, Nēmed-Laguda, (and) Dūr-Yakīn, as far as the city Kār-Nabû, which is on the shore of the sea. I conquered eight fortified cities, fortresses of the land Bīt-Yakīn, together with one hundred small(er) settlements in their environs.
When I was in Zabban, I heard from the mouth of a man of the temple of Esaggil that the temples of Babylon had been destroyed. I said: "I will rebuild them."
Shamshi-ilu,
Witness Šamaš-ahu-iddina, physician.
a cup of small onions; a ditto of quinces;
Now, whatever Bel-ušezib is sending to the king, his lord, let the king do as he deems best.
From this day on, whatever you say and do,
... I restored
The city Saʾarri.
Month Iyyar (II), 25th day, eponym year of Nabû-šarru-uṣur of Marqasa.
As to what you wrote to me: "The messenger of Mitâ the Phrygian has come to me, bringing 14 men of the Qurueans whom Uriakka had sent to Urarṭu. They are staying with me. Aššur, Šamaš and Bel have made my gods prevail over the Phrygians, and they have delivered them into our hands."
1 ... -vessel, (with) a ... , the hand of the chief confectioner of the temple;
4 ditto of silver;
From Bel-šuma-iškun, lamentation priest.
Now then I am sending them to the king, together with ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-reṣuwa. Good health to the king, my lord!
Sin-šidu, ... , his son, his wife, his daughter, NN, his son, his wife, his daughter, Uza... , his prefect, his wife, a total of 10 persons —
at the disposal of ...
He said: "It is a cart ... We shall go ... "
11 houses; ...
the governor ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Keep watch over the ... " — I have kept watch over it ...
... their offences are many. But I am their shepherd, and I have made them enter into my presence.
An estate of 2 hectares of land, a wadi — Ahi-qamu;
... the dead one ...
Witness Issar-aplu-iddina, son of NN.
... me. Pa'ê, the delegate of the Arabs, has said to me: "...
strong ...
... in Waisi I have demolished 10 villages. The king has plundered
The money is paid completely. That ... is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
May Aššur, Enlil and Ninurta, ... , give you victory, power, might and conquest. May they cause the king, my lord, to attain his heart's desire.
I have written down and
Witness NN, skipper of the Šidonians.
Seal of Salamanu, owner of the ... being sold.
1 house; 1 threshing-floor; in all 2 farmers. 60 hectares of arable land, 40 under cultivation therein; 2 houses; 1 threshing-floor; 1 vegetable garden.
Qisaya, his wife, two daughters, one son, total 5;
... I shall turn into ruins
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
You offer cooked meat before Belet-ili, make a flour/incense-offering, pour oil, honey, beer and wine, and sing, “... , O Gišpagan, you are most befitting, O Ea, you are the greatest of the gods.”
My lord is well, the ... of my lord is well, the city of ... is well, I have not written to the king, to the treasurer, my lord.
Aššur-rēša-iši, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Mutakkil-Nusku, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-dān (I) (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur: builder of the temple of the god Sîn.
... he holds ...
... to anyone
You revive ...
... The coils of the colon are 14 in number...
Enlil-nāṣir, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Puzur-Aššur, vice-regent of the god Aššur:
I set Šarru-lū-dāri, son of Rūkibtu, their former king, over the people of the city Ashkelon and imposed upon him the payment of tribute (and) gifts (in recognition) of my overlordship.
Disregard that the subject of this query, Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, is going to the city of Enlil, (or) that ...
At that time, the towers of the temple of the god Aššur, my lord, which previously had been built with baked bricks and had become dilapidated and old, I completely rebuilt with baked bricks. I raised its top (as high) as a mountain. I built (and) completed (it) from top to bottom. I deposited my monumental inscriptions.
in your prisons.
He provides roast meat before Šamaš, (while) he sings, “The heroic one.”
... the vizier
Total of the deputy of the chief eunuch of the crown prince.
The kurgarrûs and the sasanûs who were drowned in water, are Bel and Enlil, when they were plunged into the underworld.
Witness NN, chief ...
From ... hiya.
... I set for you. In ... , Taharqa ... five times in the Pleiades ... the Babylonians ...
... sent to his servant ...
NN and his people
Bel-qate-sabat,
“The foundation of the city’s wealth is ... ”
Witness Daulî, ditto.
The gall bladder is flattened. Above the 'increment' there is a 'weapon'-mark which faces downward.
... minas of silver, Ram... , merchant.
Witness Šamaš-šallim, chariot driver.
If the moon is surrounded by a black halo: the month holds rain. — Clouds will be gathered.
I settled on the alluvium of the city Ḫuḫuḫu. I founded a city (and) named it Kār-Aššur. I settled therein the people of (foreign) lands conquered by me. I placed (it) under the authority of a eunuch of mine.
... , (governor of) Assur.
In ... many days the sun ... did not rise ...
... let them speak
If the Old Man star comes close to the top of the moon and stands there: the king will stand in triumph.
and he will not let (him) live ... in the hands of his enemy.
Moreover, (as for) Ṣidqâ, the king of the city Ashkelon who had not bowed down to my yoke, I forcibly removed the gods of his father’s house, himself, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his brothers, (and other) offspring of his father’s house and took him to Assyria.
And concerning the Lady of Akkad about whom I previously wrote to the king, my lord: "She is staying in the Akitu House" —
May a future prince restore its weakened (portions and) return my inscribed name to its place. (Then) Aššur will listen to his prayers.
17 (sheep), owners of the ... being sold.
May DNN bless the king, my lord! May they consolidate the foundation of the royal throne of the king, my lord!
Now then we shall watch the (lunar) eclipse of Tebet (X); we shall write to the king, our lord, as soon as it has taken place.
... before ...
... Arzabâ ... in the middle of Kumme ... of Assyria. He says: "If the treasurer commands, I shall bring (him)." I shall go and bring (him).
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Il-amara or his sons, grandsons, brothers or nephews, or his labour-duty superior,
Concerning the substitute king about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... should go to the province of ... " —
... it is very hot; a halo ...
The temple of (the god) Aššur, which Shalmaneser (I), son of Adad-nārārī (I), king of Assyria, a king who preceded me, had built — (this temple) had become dilapidated and I rebuilt (it). I deposited my clay cone.
Witness Silim-Silim, scribe.
From Nergal-eṭir.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to his servant: "Who is this man? He is holding you back from your work — what is the king's order?"
The king's word to the clergy of the household of the delegate of the chief eunuch of Babylon: I am well; Assyria is well; you can be glad.
If a planet comes close to Regulus, the crown prince who is named by it will take the throne, and the crown prince will live for many years; the throne will be stable; the temples of the great gods will be secure; the gods will remember the temple; the king will stand in triumph.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
I do not ...
Witness Bel-...
Witness Kibinnî, haruspex. Witness Milu-ilu.
Mitinti of the land Ashkelon rebelled against the treaty of the great gods and ... sided with me. He saw the defeat of Raḫiānu (Rezin) son of ... on his throne and ... He came to his city and ... He captured ... cities. He captured Idi-Bīʾil, the Araḫu.
... brings
This is its interpretation.
and the ground beneath it is ...
(As for) Necho, Šarru-lū-dāri, (and) Pa-qruru, the kings whom the god Marduk (and) the goddess Zarpanītu, my lords, had named, they plotted evil (deeds) and spoke (their) intention(s) to one another. They said to one another: “Let us kill Taharqa (and) make the land of Egypt slip from his hands.” They dispatched their mounted messenger(s) to one another with the following message: “Let them kill Tah
If the moon's horns in intercalary Adar (XII) are very pointed: the ruler will have no opponent; the land will become happy.
The day before yesterday, Nabû-ušabši gave orders to Ša-Kudurru to bring 30 men with him to the king of Babylon. The king should inquire (about it); the men who ... with him ...
1 prayer bowl ditto;
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šar-aḫḫēšu. Good health to the king, my lord! The king, my lord, can be glad indeed about the well-being of the temple of Nabû-dā'in. The king, my lord, can be glad indeed about the well-being of my guard. Now then, I am sending the king, my lord, a tablet.
Witness NN, chief master builder.
Ši-ibši, ... ;
Shamash-ilaya,
This year may they give us corn and ... , and ... may we drink ...
at the disposal of Ereš-Issar.
10 ditto, hallam;
(As for) Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II), the king of the land Elam who had cast off the yoke of my father, who had turned hostile and (whom) none of the kings of the past had defeated — with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, I defeated him in a pitched battle and took him prisoner.
about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me
... do not fear
Atta'-idri, farmer, and his people.
There is a 'weapon'-mark in the top of the left surface of the 'finger.' The top of the 'finger' is smashed. The 'enemy' will attack the 'head.'
... I had them bring them into GN (... ) ... I received tribute from them ... in the land of Uqallu ...
Witness Šulmu-ahhe, ditto.
Ulūlu (VI), the twenty-fifth day, eponymy of Sennacherib, king of the world.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
... I roofed them with beams of cedar. I fastened bands of bronze on doors of white cedar and I installed (them) in their gates.
... will glaze bricks.
Witness Ṭab-šar-Nabû, scribe, keeper of the tablet.
... fumigants ... ;
... he ...
1 piece of abašmu-stone and 1 (gem) of a pomegranate;
Minu' ...
If a storm blows from the south: the harvest of sesame will prosper.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments...
You shall not speak evil things ... in the presence of Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, his brothers, ... , nor make common cause with those who do, nor ... there, nor say: "You are to make peace with Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, and his brothers ... "
Witness Nergal-ahu-uṣur, commander-of-fifty of ...
As ...
... the wall ...
3,000 stalks of vine.
The guard ...
... the king, my lord
... of the king ...
1 hectare — Ṣabutanu;
He trusted in his brothers and abandoned the gods. He trusted in their good looks and became confident. He plotted evil deeds and devised a treacherous plan. He plotted to kill me. He did not respect the oath of the gods and did not fear their punishment. He was constantly plotting evil things and was constantly devising evil plans. He was constantly thinking about doing away with my royal majesty and taking over my kingship.
I shall finish the barley of the lands as soon as I can.
... -ibni
... who ... his territory ... I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered.
10 ... ;
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer ...
They say: "We will not enter the palace until we have received (our) equipment." They are waiting for the king.
— This night (the moon) was surrounded by a halo; Cancer and Gemini stood in it.
Let them place ...
... I became afraid ...
5 sheep, 5 bowls (of wine): palace woman.
In the third year of my reign, the gods ... , (and) Adad ... the land of Subartu ... I received his ... and ... his land.
... which he/they ... to Marduk-apla-iddina
The king, my lord, should have mercy on his servant. I am but a dog among all the people; may I not die! May I not be deprived of my life because of them!
The people of Egypt have not submitted to my yoke. They say: "We will not come out to do our work."
... who sits on the throne and has brought about the destruction of Azâ, king of the Urarṭian, ...
And the lady Ninditu is coming to us. Let the king give us orders that she should not be detained on the road but that she should come to us.
... the Birateans of the Urarṭian who attacked him, have taken his troops up to the Birateans.
The Malakeans have set out and gone to ... The towns and the  riders have been dispersed. All the people and oxen who were brought have  been assembled in Der.
Palace of Aššur-nādin-apli, king ...
The palace of Aššur-bēl-kala, king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, son of Tiglath-pileser (I) (who was) also king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (who was) also king of the universe (and) strong king, king of Assyria:
adjoining the field of NN,
I received ... from Kibaba of the city Ḫarḫar ... horses and mules.
I sent (word) ...
Witness Ninuayu, ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
Total 19 gods of the house of God.
Witness Abunu.
a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
For his life and the well-being of his city he built Egipar.
NN, royal bodyguard;
As to the emissaries of Bit-Kapsi,
From Nabû-šuma-iškun.
Total, from the house of Ibâ.
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
Witness Mullissu-kabtat.
On my return march, I defeated all together the Tuʾumuna, Riḫiḫu, Yadaqqu, Ubudu, Gibrê, Maliḫu, Gurumu, Ubulu, Damunu, Gambulu, Ḫindaru, Ruʾuʾa, Puqudu, Ḫamrānu, Ḫagarānu, Nabatu, (and) Liʾtaʾu, insubmissive Arameans. I carried off into Assyria a substantial booty (consisting of
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-šumu-ukin. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May the gods ... remember the good ... of ... in favour of ...
... Aššur-šumu-iddina
I opened your ears and I heard your weeping. I kissed the feet of your lords and said:
Shalmaneser, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil and vice-regent of the god Aššur: I built the Tabira Gate, together with its gates, for the processional way of the city of Aššur.
... sent to me
If the Pleiades enter the moon and come out to the north: Akkad will become happy; the king of Akkad will become strong and have no rival.
and the message ...
Witness Adallal, ...
To the god Adad, the strong king, the king of all the lands, the exalted one, the king who makes the lands prosper, the one who knows how to make the harvest of the land prosper, the king who has always provided for the sanctuaries of the gods, the one who makes abundant the offerings of Ešarra, the one who provides for Ekur, the one who makes the sanctuaries of the lands prosper, the one who has always provided for Sumer and Akkad, the one who provides for the cult centers, the one who provides for the sanctuaries
5 minas of silver, 5 togas, 5 tunics, 1 pot of (wine from) Borsippa, 100 jars: all tribute; the queen;
You shall not make common cause with any other country against Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, concerning Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, nor make common cause with any other country against Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, concerning Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, nor with any other country, nor with any other person, nor with any other thing, nor with any other country, nor with any other person, nor with any other thing,
A sign from Sagab (591 B.C.) to Nabû-šar-ahhešu, who brings (the sign) for six years in a row.
1 talent of ... -stone for 2 ... ;
Total 6 witnesses from Bit-Eriba-ila'i.
Total, 30 minas of silver ... , instead of the silver ...
I have also brought a letter from the governor of Mazamua. He says: "I have sent my messenger to the Palace."
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-šar-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord!
a ... and ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
I will hear the report of my messenger ... as soon as he returns.
... they have gone
6, Gutian ... ,
(               ) People of Subartu (... )
The money is paid completely. That field is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The whole temple was gird. All the gods of the king are well.
The sign of the king ...
If the king, my lord, commands, I will have them brought and do as the king, my lord, commands.
... arrow
... Bel-sama' ...
... the dog(s) of the country ...
The 'cavity' of the left lung is split.
He shall pay the silver in its original amount on the 30th of Tishri (VII). If he does not pay, it shall increase 4 shekels of silver per month.
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-alik-pani. Good health to the king, my lord!
who makes the foundation of the throne of my priestly office firm, (and) who constantly establishes my good reputation (and) protects the life of my offspring;
2 cuts of shoulder. Of x oxen: the stomach, the liver,
Month Iyyar (II), 15th day, eponym year of Kanunayu of Dur-Šarruken.
... s of Nabû-ahhe-... , chief ...
Sennacherib, ... , the creation ... , the lord ...
The breast-bone is thick...
Šakiru, slave of Ahabû —
... from the day that ...
... I marched to the land Lullumê. I conquered the cities Maqirâ (and) Andarî ... the land Adauš, which is at the feet of these mountains ... I crossed the Zab River. I conquered the lands Lullumê and Adauš ... I subdued to my yoke. I exercised authority over them forever.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
3 haunches, 6 rib cuts;
Witness Šarru-lu-dari.
In a one-half nindanu (stretch) of the water’s (natural) course, I bonded together with bitumen four large limestone (blocks) and spread marsh reeds and rushes over them. I added 500 ... cubits to the previous length (of the palace) and 280 cubits to its width. I raised its superstructure 190 courses of brick high.
in the city ...
shall place 10 minas of silver (and) one mina of gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Total, 2 horses, 5 chariots, 50 shield (bearers), 50 bowmen, total 100 men ... , 5 horses, ... Nabû-ahu-iddina, ...
with the land of ...
Witness NN, scribe of the crown prince.
Ditto by Arbail, ditto by Nineveh, ditto by Šamši-ilu, ditto by Adad, ditto by Šamši-ilu, ditto by Ištar of Heaven, ditto by Ninurta, ditto by Nergal, ditto by Nergal-uballiṭ, ditto by Nergal-uballiṭ (and) Nergal-uballiṭ-kidmuri!
If ... in the path of the Enlil stars ... : Akkad will become happy; the king of Akkad will become strong and have no rival.
... me
NN, 12 oxen, gold;
The moon is surrounded by a halo and
(As for) the one who destroys an inscribed object bearing my name and the name of my father, (or) erases my inscribed name by some crafty device, may the great gods of heaven and netherworld overthrow his kingship (and) make his name (and) seed disappear from the land.
... to the šandabakku
shall place x minas of silver (and) one mina of gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owner.
shall give 2 minas of silver.
I have ... ed ...
of the fort ...
17 homers of refined oil;
Witness Qarhâ, ditto.
I put to the sword the people of the city Akkuddu, who live on Mount Nipur, a rugged mountain. I poured out the blood of their warriors (and) filled the plain of the city with their corpses. I annexed that land to Assyria (and) imposed upon it tax and tribute.
livers, kidneys, hearts;
... we shall put before Belet-ili ...
With my merciless bodyguard and my raging troops, I pursued them (the Arameans) to the city ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Ninurta-le'i. Good health to the king, my lord!
I brought out Padî, their king, from the city Jerusalem and placed (him) on the lordly throne over them, then I imposed upon him payment (in recognition) of my overlordship.
(As for) Akkuddu of the city Šinuḫtu, who had put his trust in Mitâ, the king of the land Musku, and had committed a crime (and) an offense, I captured him alive, together with the people of his city, his chariots, ... his daughters, ... I ...
The god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises.
... I returned ...
... ;
... camp
Aššur-rēša-iši, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, whom the gods Anu, Enlil, and the great gods selected through extispicy and named for shepherding Assyria; son of Mutakkil-Nusku, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur; son of Aššur-rēša-iši (I), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aš
... ;
The women go to Nineveh and ...
... there
Witness Erṣiṣi.
... did not ...
Witness Bahî.
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, then I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, fortified cities, together with the small(er) settlements in their environs (and) the district of the land Bīt-Barrû in its entirety, and I added (this area)
After the king has entered the palace, the Lady of the Land ... sits on her seat. They bring the oxen and sheep of the house of Dagan before the king. Aššur sits on his seat.
— Saturn stands in the halo of the moon.
If a planet is red: plenty for the people.
If Nergal in his appearance is bright and his features are clear: the stars of the sky will come close to each other; the enemy will attack Akkad; the troops will be confused; the enemy will take the road to Akkad; in the steppe cattle and sheep will not prosper; the gods will have mercy on Akkad.
... red, rear part;
Mercury is moving towards Saturn.
The vertebrae are recessed. The 'cavity' of the ... lung is ...
The ... s of his ... are very good. Ea, Šamaš, Asalluḫi and Abi-il, all of them, are very well. The king, my lord, can be very glad.
whether ...
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
The king, the creator of this garden and the fountain, the one who provides for this cedar, the one who protects the throne, the one who performs sheep offerings, the one who provides for all the temples,
Witness ... la...
The land of Dagunu ... ; the king, my lord, wrote
He does not ... to be appointed ...
So that the work would be carried out correctly, I invited into my presence the wise elders of the gods of heaven and earth, and they gave me a firm ‘yes’ (regarding) my request. Then, at the beginning of the month, the gods Sîn and Šamaš, in their pure, exalted presence, commanded the completion of my work. I firmly established the foundation(s) of my royal throne forever.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nammir. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord.
In the month of Šer'i-eburi, the day of my lordly majesty, I had the great palace of that (lit. “their”) wall built anew for my royal residence.
Esarhaddon, fear not! I will put the gods to rights from Assyria!
and ...
This night, on the 5th day, the king ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Balasî. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Witness Nabû-eriba, deputy.
Witness Aya-adad, staff-bearer.
4 ...
The front, outer cuts;
Month ... , xth day, eponym year of Issi-Adad-aninu.
I shall harvest the barley in Sarugi and in the city of Gudunu, and I shall bring it over.
Seal of Adad-ahu-iddina, owner of the people being sold.
News of Bit-Dakuri: he is staying in ... ; his watch is strong.
I am sending ...
... "
A tablet of Urzana to the palace herald. Good health to you!
... I enlarged ... for its ... I made ... enter ...
... Mannu-ki-...
The city Tīda... I laid waste to its meadowlands, which ... I burned with fire. I did not spare a single one of the palatial halls. I leveled it from top to bottom.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let the prelates of ... and ... come ... " — they did not come ... They sent ... , and he spoke with him as follows: "... let me come ... "
Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, has contracted and bought them from Mannu-ki-Ninua for 17 1/2 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish from Sin-šumu-...
I drove out the people of the land Bīt-Amukāni and (then) I brought their people to Assyria. I settled them in the city Sapia, a city of theirs.
... of my lord ...
From this very fact, O king, my lord, how can one servant and the very day he enters his house and is sent (to do) his duty, be loyal to the king, my lord?
From where I am to where I go, I have no rival. I have seized the barley and piled it up there. I have also seized the men there.
Isana
May any future prince whom (the god) Aššur names for shepherding the land and people (vii 10') read aloud this inscription written in his (own) hand and (then) anoint (it) with oil, make an offering, (and) set (it) back in its place. (The god) Aššur will (then) listen to his prayers.
... the king, my lord
If a star flares up like a torch: the sun ...
If Venus becomes visible in Sivan (III): fall of the enemy.
Total 7, of Adad-...
Total 6 women.
... I have seen
of the king from the country ...
... you did not guard ...
Witness Ubru-... , mayor of Qudaru.
to ...
... came
The officiant pours a cup of water and a cup of beer into the river. He throws in a lamb, and sings: “... , ... , ... ” The goddess Ištar receives ... in the temple of Akkad. The goddess Ištar is clothed with ... , she has not eaten, the goddess Ištar is clothed with ...
I laid its foundations on top of (its) original foundation(s). I built (and) completed (it) from top to bottom. I deposited my monumental inscription. May a later prince restore its weakened (portions and) return my inscribed name to its place. (Then) Aššur will listen to his prayers.
... fish
The 'well-being' is overturned and faces downward...
NN and his people, Tuqunu-ereš and his people, NN and his people,
The king, my lord, sent me a ... ; this is what I wrote to the king, my lord:
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial audience gift from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
x jars of wine:
Good health to my brother. May Aššur and Ešarra bless my brother for my brother.
... his associates
Perhaps the commandant of Babylon will write to the king, my lord, that the citizens of Babylon are being deported to the country. They have been deported because of the commandants' order that "your chariots are to be sold for silver." The citizens of Babylon are not citizens of Babylon; they are citizens of Borsippa and Cutha. They have been deported because of the order that "your chariots are to be sold for silver." When the commandant has arrested the men from among them, my messengers have gone to the country.
... is not ...
... ;
... upon the Urarṭian, who since he was young had not had regard for the land of Akkad, (and) had sent his messengers to the land of the Urarṭian, and who had not feared the god Aššur, my lord, and had not inquired about the well-being of his people, and had not inquired about the well-being of his (own) land, I seized the great gods on account of these people and I imposed upon them the ... of the Urarṭian. I did not let them go free, I did not release them
... The king, my lord, should ask the servants of the king who say: "The king is a rash fellow! Let me come to an arrangement with the king, my lord, so that I do not have to serve him!" Let one of the exorcists or physicians appoint me to a position of trust, and let me do the work ...
If the Scales' position is stable: there will be truth in the land.
who ... his staff
I dismantled the outposts that I had constructed against Baʾalu, the king of the land Tyre. By sea and dry land, I opened (all of) his routes, as many as I had seized. I received from him his substantial payment. I turned around (lit. “I turned the front of my yoke”) and returned safely to Assyria.
Witness Samsi, cohort commander.
... my army. You ...
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "How many bull colossi have you made?" — they have made 10 ... and 10 bull colossi.
10 ditto, hallam;
Witness Šep-Aššur, ...
Now then they are going to the king, my lord.
Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, who is now intent on ... and (whom) your great divinity knows —
2 talents, the fuller of the cloaks;
... ditto,
(As for) Baʾalu, the king of the land Tyre who did not respect my royal command(s), I set up outposts against him. By sea and dry land, I took control of (all of) his routes.
Witness Uqur-ahhê.
When the messenger came to me on the cavalry, he said: "I am a dead man. Since I have taken the field of the Elamite, until I hear from the king, my lord, that the king will listen to me, I will die. The king, my lord, will hear my case. Let the king, my lord, be happy."
I marched to the city Madaktu, his royal city. In the month Tebētu (X), the (most) powerful month, they (the gods) disclosed to me an auspicious omen, the equal of (their) previous omen, and (then) I turned around (lit. “I turned the front of my yoke”) and took the road to Assyria.
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let them come here and ... the bull colossi" —
... the whole work
Witness Ubur-raši.
“The one who overwhelms his enemies”: the people of the land of the Arabs, one by one, were submissive to Bel. They did not raise their hands against each other. The land of the Arabs was peaceful. There was no hostility between the treaty of Aššur and the great gods. All was well with Assurbanipal, the beloved of the god Enlil.
As long as the (four) quarters (of the world) exist,
... the Urarṭian(s) ...
After I had made them, I myself saw the ... of my father, the one who had engendered me. I myself saw Šamaš-šumu-ukin, the one who had taken away my brother, the one who had made Šarru-nādin-šumi, my brother, disappear. I saw Aššur-mukin-paleya, the one who had taken away my brother, the one who had made the chief eunuch take the road to the presence of Aššur, the one who had made the son of the chief eunuch take
... he will finish the series
The gods Aššur, Sīrū, Ea, Belet-ili, Anu, Enlil, Ea, and Ninurta, the great gods, the Igīgū gods, the Anunnakū gods, all of the gods who dwell in the heavens and netherworld, all of the gods who are clothed with brilliance, all of the gods who are endowed with power, all of the gods who are exalted, all of the gods who are clothed with splendor, all of the gods who are clothed with radiance
... king of Elam
Does your great divinity know it? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Disregard the (formulation) of the prayer for today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-belu-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! The city of Der and the fort are well.
He ...
Total, 20 shekels.
The ... s who entered you
... who loves him will go to the river ordeal, and he will be killed in the middle of the river.
... inspected
I destroyed that district (and) turned (it) into ruins. With the support of the great gods, I defeated all of my enemies (and) took prisoners. I brought all of (those people) to Nineveh.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Witness Nabû-abu-uṣur, ...
Witness Silim-ili.
Samaria, ...
... in the side of ...
NN, ... donkey(s):
... of the city Kulmuḫu
... the 'hand' of god ...
... their words ...
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, unrivalled king, pious shepherd who reveres the great gods, guardian of truth who loves justice, renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the insubmissive, (and) the one who strikes enemies with lightning:
... I will not change.
(As for) the rest of the Arabs who had fled from my weapons, Erra, their god, had mercy on them and allowed them to live. (viii 10') They (the Arabs) saw the might of the gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk) and Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela, the great gods, my lords, and
Ditto by Sin, Šamaš, Adad and Marduk!
He said: "We cannot go out tomorrow. We shall go and fetch the statues on the 10th of Ab (V). If it is the 20th or the ... th of Elul (VI), we shall fetch them then."
If a planet becomes visible in ... : rain and flood will last long.
240 bows;
20 minas of black wool,
... and did not speak with us. As the king's servants, we ...
Witness ... bi-atar.
1 seah 1 'litre' of regular offering loaves;
And let the king send a royal eunuch to ... , so he can appoint him to the position ...
I brought back all together the chariots along with their horses, whose drivers had been killed in the thick of (that) mighty battle and whose wheels had turned (lit. “rolled”) about (lit. “turned over”), together with two (other) teams of horses that they had abandoned.
4 ... ;
... of Bit-Hamban ... will go to Yasub (and) kill ...
The king, my lord, knows that the tower of Marduk-šakin-šumi
The charge of the 'Lady of Cults' is doing very well; the king, my lord, can be very glad indeed.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, (or) have changed or altered the proceedings...
a ditto of small onions;
... his fathers
And as to what my lord said: "The gods have become angry and ... are giving you ... "
To the king, my lord: your servant Na'di-ilu. Good health to the king, my lord!
We kept watch on the 29th day; we did not see the moon. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king my lord!
... cavalry ...
5 ditto — Il-hari
I myself prayed to the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl, Nabû, Nergal, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela, the gods who support me, (and) they immediately heeded my prayers (and) came to my aid.
... about the word of the king ... I myself ... my brothers ...
If on the 14th day the moon and sun are seen together: reliable speech; the land will become happy; the gods will remember Akkad favorably.
I surrounded (and) conquered twelve fortified cities on the peak of Mount Muṣri, (namely) the cities Marʾubištu (and) Marʾubišu.
... his ... s to the banquet
Now then ...
... have become hostile
... the army ...
Witness Busi-ilani, ditto.
Those who came out of the city Hamath ... and came before me, I have sent back. Those people who were at the beginning of the procession in Borsippa ...
The king gave the following order: "Inspect and report on all the cult centres of Akkad!"
The day before yesterday I went to the king, my lord. Now then, let a royal messenger go to Ma'umaya and question him.
1 goose, 1 duck, 10 turtledoves.
To the king, my lord: your servant Akkullanu. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
From Nabû-šuma-iškun.
Palace of Sîn-šarra-iškun.
Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
I destroyed (and) demolished his cities, (and) turned (them) into ruins by the command of the god Gīra.
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, the one who (re)constructed the temple of the god Aššur, (re)built Esagil and Babylon, renewed the statues of the great gods, king of Egypt, king of Meluḫḫa, king of the four quarters (of the world), son of Sennacherib, king of the world (and) king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II
From the throne of Bel-Harran as far as the fort of Adad-remanni from ... to Dur-Tukulti-apil-Ešarra x leagues x stretches x rods from the throne of Bel-Harran as far as the fort.
Witness Bel-...
I detained him
After Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, has gone to his fate, Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, will sit on the royal throne. You shall not make common cause with any other king or any other lord, nor with any other country, nor with any other people, nor with any other army, nor with any other camp, nor with any other bodyguard, nor with any other bodyguard, nor with any other army, nor with any other camp, nor with any other country, nor with any other people, nor with any other army, nor with any other camp,
The god Aššur, the great lord, ... the god Anu, king of the Igīgū and Anunnakū gods, lord of the lands, the god Abu, ... , the god Ea, king of the apsû, ... , the goddess Tašmētu, beloved of the god Sîn, ... , the goddess Šamēl, ... , the god Šamšī-ilu, ... , ... who makes my reign secure, ... , ... who makes my kingship great, ...
Whoever erases my inscribed name or removes my inscribed name from the wall or destroys my inscribed name by water, or covers (it) with earth, or places (it) in another wall, or removes my inscribed name from the mouth of the enemy, may the goddess Ištar, mistress of war and battle, not come to his aid. May she remove his eyesight and make him wander about in darkness. May she make his limbs wither away and may the god Aššur, my lord, curse him angrily.
From Nabû'a of Assur.
Nergal-... , son of Ana-Nabû-taklak,
Witness ... -ilu, eunuch.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Where are the rest of the troops?" My major-domo is delayed by the rest of the troops.
Nušku-duri, ... ; 2 women; a total of 3 people.
Nabû-ahu-uṣur, fowler;
Total, 60 ...
The gall bladder is flattened. And for the king's sake and the sake of Kalmu, they keep watch over it, (and) it does not come out.
There is a 'foot'-mark in the left side of the lung. The top of the breast-bone is split.
... -kuṣur
Witness Zarutî, physician.
Witness Ahu-illika, servant of the chief eunuch.
a reed basket ...
The king should ask the 'head' of the lord of the banquet. They have raged in the river, and I have raged too.
Sukkaya;
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
The messenger of the king of Babylon came to the king of Babylon in Nisan (I). In Nisan (I) the messenger of the king of Babylon came to him. In the month of Sivan (III) the bull which he had slaughtered was weighed out and a sealed document of the bull which was weighed out in the market of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, was weighed out and a talent and 20 minas of gold and a talent of red wool were given to the king of Babylon by the messenger.
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur (and) the gods Šerua, Ištar of Bīt-Kidmuri, Bēlet-ilī, Ḫaya, Kusu, Liphur-ilu, Dunga, (and) the palace of the gods, (and) the great gods:
stomachs, livers, kidneys, hearts;
The king, my lord, can be glad indeed.
In his second regnal year, Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, mustered his chariotry (and) troops.
The Itu'eans whom I appointed to the fort have returned this favour for me. They have told the royal bodyguard (as follows):
... my messenger
Concerning Nabû-qati-ṣabat and Šamaš-... about whom the king, our lord, wrote to us: "...
May DNN bless the king of the universe, my lord, for many years.
This from before Aššur.
Now, let the king ask Arbayu here; he should find out the news about his servant and write it to me.
I had a chariot of ebony, the product of the mountain gods, the lords of the gods, my lords, made for the god Marduk, king of the totality of heaven and netherworld, to defeat my enemies.
He shall have the usufruct of the field for 3 years and 3 crop years.
7,000 barley rations by the seah of 6 'litres' at my disposal.
Belonging to Haza-ilu, in all 2 servants of the lady of the house, of the crown prince, owner of the man being sold.
I have written to the king, my lord, the things that ...
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered 88 fortified cities, fortresses of Chaldea, together with 820 small(er) settlements in their environs.
10 shoots (of sesame);
The money is paid completely. That field, house, and threshing floor are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
From Ašaredu.
Ahiqar and the servants of Šarrat-nipha have delivered the sealed document to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, has written to me through the royal bodyguard. The king, my lord, has given back the field of the gods of the king, my lord.
The king came out. He performed sheep offerings and burnt offering. He offered fat oxen and fat sheep. He threw finest flour on the censers of the gods. He poured oil, honey, beer and wine ...
10 tablets ... ,
20, Assyrian, keepers of the tablet;
He shall give all his criminals back to their owners.
He performs a funerary offering, treats the gods,
Ubru-... , NN, Ahu-... , Se'-... , NN,
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who loves the god Aššur and the goddess Mullissu, the one who is assiduous towards their shrines, the one who is attentive to their command(s), the one who is assiduous towards their sanctuaries, the one who is submissive to their yoke, the one who reveres their great divinity, son of Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned the image of the god Aššur and
1, the staff-bearer of the villages, assigned to Zarutî, cohort commander;
Witness Nabû-ahhe-iddina, baker.
Horse trainer of the open chariotry.
Now then the Šubrian emissary is on his way to the king, my lord. What should I tell the king, my lord, about their words?
The god Ninurta, the heir who makes opposing forces agree, looked steadfastly upon me and made my heart greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises. He made the gods of the city Kar-Adad, the god Adad, take the road to the god Nabû, his lord. He made all of their weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises.
The forts ...
... thousand ... of the city Uppumu
Witness Didî.
2 jerboas;
Month Iyyar (II), 26th day, eponym year of Gabbaru.
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the city ... tu, a royal city of the land Elam.
... who dwells in a distant place ...
the governor of Calah ...
Qarradunu (and) Iqisu, the gods, will hear your prayer.
Mak... , servant of Bel-Harran-isse'a and Mannu-ki-... —
Witness Bubutu.
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of Assyria, unrivalled king, pious shepherd who reveres the great gods, guardian of truth who loves justice, renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the insubmissive, (and) the one who strikes enemies with lightning:
... I laid at its gate. I erected a ... statue of the goddess Zarpanītu, who ...
The bread of the inner sanctum and of all the temples is excellent. The chief baker of the House of Aššur has taken care of it.
1 ditto of šubû-stone for 1.
Witness Mušezib-Aššur, ...
... they are transporting
... he took
Witness Se'-ila'i, ditto.
Palace of Sargon (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, favorite of the great gods;
I have heard the news of my lord; there is much ...
... and ...
... before me, they grasped my feet and kissed my feet. I had mercy on them and (then) I put (their) hands and feet in irons and brought (them) to GN, my city.
... Šumma-šarri, chariot fighter
With the support of Aššur, my lord, I advanced from the city Tušḫu. I brought across the Euphrates in flood (and) crossed (it) at a ford. I conquered the cities Pitrāra, their fortified city, (and) Dērāya, a city of mine. I conquered the city Marṣiš, a royal city of theirs, (and) carried off 22,000 booty (and) property. With the might of Aššur, my lord, I brought about the defeat of the
... to Nisan (I)
... the palace chariot driver
The chief eunuch and the kings do not agree to give the feet of the king's servants until they have been paid in full. They stand (there) until they are paid in full and then go to sit on your throne.
... for the preservation of his life, my lord, to Nergal and Laṣ is ... ; let him seize the hand of the house of the good man of Cutha in the presence of the king.
... them
... men from among them
You shall not speak evil, malicious or otherwise, nor make common cause with his enemy, nor with his relatives, nor with his uncles, nor with his nephews, nor with his brothers, nor with his uncles, nor with his cousins, nor with his relatives of the patrimony of his father, nor with his brothers, nor with his nephews, nor with his uncles, nor with his cousins, nor with his relatives of the patrimony of his uncles, nor with his cousins, nor with his uncles, nor with his nephews, nor with his brothers
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me:
... Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, will be troubled and angry.
1 gold ring, 1/5 shekel in weight; 1 hand-ring, 32 1/3 shekels: Ahu-duri, son of NN.
... I ...
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments...
Witness Akkudanu.
Šarri-nuri, farmer, 6 persons; Milki-nuri, farmer, x persons; NN, ... ;
Month Adar (XII), 12th day.
... many ...
... sweet oil ...
Whatever my brother says and writes to me,
Let the lord of kings summon them and have them brought here. They should be questioned in their house ... whether ...
in this city ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šarru-emuranni. Good health to the king, my lord!
From Nergal-eṭir.
... until now
4 female donkeys in exchange for 32 shekels.
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
One who is opposed to the king, my lord, will be defeated.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Balaṭu-ereš or his sons or grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Mušallim-Issar,
Month Iyyar (II), 28th day, eponym year of Aššur-naṣir.
3 overcoats, the front red, ... ;
Witness Inurta-isse'a.
Thirty, regular (goats),
... front
The gods Sîn (and) Nikkal ...
... the town ...
... the xth day;
I am well; he can be glad.
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract, whether Babilayu or his sons, grandsons, brothers or nephews, or his prefect, or any relative of his, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against the lady of Borsippa,
Let the king come here and perform the nāṭu ritual of this month. Let him perform the sheep offerings and the sheep offerings of the series of the king's  temple.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the 4th day of this month, the month ... , to the 11th day of Sivan (III) of this year,
Bel-aplu-iddina sent his son to the house of Ibnaya, son of Nur-Sin, but he did not marry.
This is its interpretation.
... very
Šumma-ilani has contracted and bought them for x minas of silver.
garments ...
NN, bodyguard of the queen mother;
... as follows
who ... with the support of Aššur, my lord, has subdued the insubmissive and brought about the submission of the unsubmissive,
the greatness of the great god, the splendor of the great gods ...
Witness Nabû-balassu-iqbi, fowler.
Let the king send a scribe to Balassu, the prelate, so he can be questioned about the ... of the banquet.
Witness Kablu-Issar, rab sikkāti. Witness NN.
Total, of the son of Remanni-Nabû.
The coils of the colon are 14 in number.
... not ...
... or the ...
Naṣiru saw this sign and wrote a report to the king, his lord. But when he read it aloud to him, it was ... and ... of Assyria. It was ... of Babylonia.
Month Tishri (VII), 8th day, eponym year of Bel-Harran-shadua (650).
To the king, my lord: your servant PN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Bel and Nabû bless the king, my lord!
The gate of ... , ...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the ... th day of this month, the month ... of this year, to the 23rd day of the month Marchesvan of this year, for ... days and nights, my stipulated term,
Aššur-la-kenu-ubbib,
Isî, his wife, Banî, his son of 5 spans' height, Dâyanu, his son of x spans' height, Ramâ, his daughter, a total of 5 people —
NN, farmer, and his people.
Marduk-šumu-uṣur, Naṣiru and Tabnî ...
The son of Nikkal-iddin has written to the king of Elam and to Humbanigaš, saying: "... the king of Assyria and the camp ...
their prefects ...
Abi-ila'i;
... to the presence
I exercised authority over Karduniaš (Babylonia) ... I imposed upon the chieftains of Chaldea annual tribute (and) payment.
Now then I am sending you to Dur-Šarruken. You will ... the bull colossi on your ... as ... as ...
... Nabonidus, king of Babylon, strong king, king of the world, king of Sumer and Akkad, ...
I shall ... what ...
As to the news of Belšunu, the Dakureans whom the king, my lord, sent to him have not returned to him, nor have they spoken with him. When I heard this, I sent (word) and had them arrested.
Concerning the troops about whom the king, my lord, wrote to his servant: "For how many days should they be on the alert?"
If the moon becomes visible in Tebet (X) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour Subartu; a foreigner will rule the Westland.
... with Urad-...
He places it on the censer, performs a sheep offering, and a ox offering.
When the god Marduk heard my prayer and my supplication, he ordered the destruction of the land of the people of the Qutu and the land of the Nubians. If Gizagara, the great ruler, who is called by the name of the god Sîn and the goddess Ningal, is to be called by the name of the god Nabû and the goddess Ningal, he will live for a long time.
... have no fear ...
... ditto, white;
2 talents of linen;
4 minas of silver, debts of Šamaš-ila'i, which he paid to Saili and Sailu, and which Šamaš-ila'i recovered.
If a fog rolls in Shebat (XI): eclipse of the Kassites.
Seal of Šamaš-ku... ,
The very moment he had committed the crime, water from the cistern was thrown upon him ...
A writing-board ...
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract, whether Nabû-eriba or the governor, or the deputy (governor), shall pay 12 minas of silver.
Marduk-...
1, overseer(s) of the streets;
Concerning what the king wrote to us: "Make the house beautiful" — we have made the house beautiful. What else? Let them finish the rest of the work in the same way.
At the beginning of my reign, in the first year, I mustered my numerous troops (and) ... the great gods, my lords, I had (them) take the road to the land Nairi. In the course of (that) campaign, I had my sons, my own offspring, die.
You are a hero, a warrior, one who loves justice,
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me,
On my second campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me and I marched to the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians, who since time immemorial had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors. In the high mountains, difficult terrain, I rode on horseback and had my personal chariot carried on (men’s) necks. In very rugged terrain I roamed about on foot like a wild bull.
king of the world, ... ,
I put to the sword the population of the city Ḫirimmu, a dangerous enemy who since time immemorial had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors. I did not leave one alive (of them). I reorganized that district (and) imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the gods of Assyria, my lords.
which in my presence ...
I am loyal to the king. May the king do as he deems best. Just as I am loyal to the king,
Witness Barruqu, ditto.
and ...
... he
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
... have returned
... he is a carpenter; he ... with ...
An estate of 40 hectares of sown land
17th day, eponym year of Ṣalmu-šarri-iqbi.
8 females, of 5 spans' height;
I have ... ed the cornfield
... I am a servant of the king. If it is all right,
Šumma-Adad, ...
8 (cuts of) meat, a ... ;
Witness Sukkaya.
... the king, my lord, ...
Witness Aššur-šumu-uṣur.
... I conquered the land Nalû and (then) I reorganized the land ... I brought the people of (foreign) lands conquered by me therein. I annexed to Assyria the lands Sardurri, Lusia, Sua, (and) Bīt-Zūi, fortified cities in the land Urarṭu, together with their districts. I added (those districts) to the province of the treasurer.
I received ...
If at the moon's appearance its right horn becomes long, and its left horn short: the king will conquer a land not his own.
... of your house ...
anyone ... the daughter of Babâ ...
The city Akkad with ...
... all ...
An estate of Nur-danu, chariot driver, assigned to Sailâ, his son.
The officiant should not go down to the river ... ; they should stay ...
Moreover, I roofed them (the palatial halls) with beams of cedar grown on Mount Amanus. I installed in them doors of cedar, whose scent is sweet, (and) which are fast in their fastening(s), (and) I secured (them) with strong lock(s). I decorated them with slabs of alabaster, which shine like a brilliant day, and (thus) I made (them) an object of wonder.
Why does the king, our lord, say: "... seized ...
From Balasî.
Seal of Bel-tarṣi-ilumma, eunuch of Adad-nārārī, king of the universe, governor of the city Kalḫu, land Ḫamedi, land Tērme, (and) land Yaluna, son of Bēl-tarṣi-ilumma, eunuch of Adad-nārārī, king of the universe.
Ešabbar, “House, abode of plenty”: the house of Gula.
x cans of beer;
... Now, just as the king, my lord, commanded, "You are to release ... " — I am releasing them. Let them ... to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should know that I have no other lord. I have only one lord. I have been devoted to the king, my lord, since I was small. I have not been devoted to any other lord. Your gods are in my hands.
May the gods who reside in Arbela bless the king, my lord.
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, wise prince, circumspect ruler, shepherd of the people, (and) leader of a widespread population, I:
20 ditto, ... ;
The king of Babylon and the king of the land Elam fled before my fierce weapons and escaped inside their chariot(s). They (then) flew up into the heavens like birds and disappeared.
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhe.
... of the daughter ...
Adad-nerari (III), overseer, son of Šamši-Adad (V), overseer, son of Shalmaneser (III), likewise overseer.
(As for) the son of (the king of) Assyria, his own offspring, he did not know the (deeper) truth of his father’s heart. He trusted in the words of his own heart, did not pay attention to the counsel of his father, and gave (himself) over to the enemy. He listened to the words of his own mouth, and they led him astray. The people of the land of Akkad, all of them, were gathered inside the city and the open country. They put iron fetters on their arms and hands and imprisoned them.
... the 'path' ...
Witness Idraya, priest of Ninurta.
Palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of the universe, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of the universe: property of the palace of the king of the lands.
... and if ...
When they were taken prisoners and brought to the king, our lord, ...
... you are valiant
1/2 mina ... ;
My enemies will give the king, my lord, horses from the enemy. The king, my lord, will receive them in the audience.
Ninurta-nirka-da''in.
Now then ... I have stationed guards in all the outposts of his route, from the border to the border, and have sent his whole army on the road in accordance with his route. They will be at the gate of the outpost when he comes. They will enter, take the booty, and go on their way. I have stationed guards on all the roads.
An estate of x hectares of land
By the command of the god Aššur I ...
If the moon at its appearance ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... your ... , the trees
Witness Zar-Issar.
in accordance with the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord, and your favorable decisions, should the subject of this query, Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, strive and plan? Should he send ... to the cities of ... ? Is it pleasing to your great divinity?
To the king, my lord: your servant Inurta-belu-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord!
... me. The king, the great lord, Marduk, has greatly blessed me and ...
Witness Silim-Aššur, grand vizier.
to your ...
... pomegranate ...
Month Iyyar (II), 5th day, eponym year of NN.
... the rear of the house, which Ilu-uṣur
Witness Nabû-rehtu-aṣur, chief tailor.
1, Tutî, village manager;
12 8, total 20 — ...
Witness Inurta-zeru-uṣur, scribe.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nadin-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk greatly bless the king, my lord!
Palace of Adad-nārārī, king of the universe, son of Arik-dīn-ili, king of Assyria: (brick) belonging to the šahūru anteroom.
2 black horses,
The forts and temples are well; the gods ...
He shall pay one mina of silver.
... are full to the brim ...
Seal of Se'-zabadi, owner of the woman being sold.
The gate opposite Aššur is the Gate of Kingship. The gate opposite its ziggurrat, which is toward the courtyard of the Assyrian Ištar, is the Gate of the Path of the Enlil-Stars.
The king, my lord, should ask the (members) of the city council of Šabirešu whether I have not been coming (there) and whether I have not been sending my chariot-driver and my messengers.
Ayyāru (II), the twenty-fourth day, eponymy of Nabû-šar-aḫḫēšu, governor of the city Samaria (645).
... Ariye ...
x ... of field in the town of ... , adjoining 150 hectares of field in the village of Qanâ-il, ... ,
6 minas, 2 bowls ... for bowls not ... ;
From Adad-šumu-uṣur.
... governors ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ra'im-nišešu. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû (and) Marduk bless the king.
The city Aššur-iddina I conquered in its third year.
... are deficient. To ...
... -aplu-iddina 2 persons, Urad-Nabû 2 persons, Nabû-šabši 7 persons,
2 ... ;
Whoever alters this tablet or erases my inscribed name, ... this treaty, and does away with the oath (sworn by) Aššur, king of the gods, and the great gods, my lords, ... , may the image of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, be overthrown; may the image of Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, be overthrown; may the image of his brothers, the ... , the great lords, be overthrown; may the seal of the great lord, the god Ašš
... his ...
"I will pour out a libation bowl to (show) mercy for the servant."
... , workroom
The 20th day: let him kill a snake: he will reach the highest rank.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
7 homers 7 homers — the town of Habranu;
84 83 82 ... 35 from the inner city ... ;
If the moon and sun are in balance: reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the world will make his throne last long.
... of the fort
They are also collecting water in the city Ammê, and bringing it into the city Bīt-Bunakki.
A bag of (mixed) kernels. A cup of ... -bread; a jar of ... -beer;
Month Tebet (X), 25th day, eponym year of Mannu-ki-Adad of Ṣupat.
They came and told me:
... , ... huru ditto, Dari-Bel ditto, NN ... ,
... the land of the Qumānu as far as the land Melid, I conquered. I captured the city Ḫunusâ ... I restored and (then) set up my stele thereon. I restored the great city, their royal city, to its former status. I ... the goddess Ištar ... to my city Aššur ... I made enter therein. I brought out the booty and possessions of the land of the Qumānu ... I settled (them) in my land.
The king, my lord, will ...
I had foundation inscriptions made of silver, gold, bronze, lapis lazuli, alabaster, basalt, pendû-stone, (and) ašgikû-stone, (as well as) inscribed objects of baked clay, and (then) I wrote on them the might of the great hero, the god Marduk, (and) the deeds that I had done (and) I placed (these inscriptions) in (the foundations of) the cedar(s) that I had cut down. I deposited (them) in the found
The city Aria, (which is) on the shore of the sea,
Concerning Bel-iqiša, a citizen of Assyria, a man who had grown up in my care, who had become hostile to Aššur, and who did not respect the oath of Aššur, king of the gods, (and) who did not honor the oath of Esarhaddon, king of the world, his lord, (and) who had committed a crime, may the god Aššur, the king of the gods, the father who engendered the gods, bring about the defeat of his land. May he not learn about the de
Bel-emuranni,
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Eltekeh (and) Tamnâ. I approached the city Ekron and I killed the governors (and) nobles who had committed crime(s) and (iii 10) hung their corpses on towers around the city; I counted the citizens who had committed the criminal acts as booty; (and) I commanded that the rest of them, (those) who were not guilty of crimes or wrongdoing, (to) whom no penalty was due, be allowed to go free.
If a planet ... becomes visible: rain and flood ...
Witness Šulmu-ahhe, royal bodyguard.
6 shekels of silver, Bahianu, for Haliṣi, at the (time of) the break.
Total 11 ...
Witness Kenî, ditto.
May they make the people of all of the settlements under me prosper!
To the king, my lord: your servant Ululayu. The best of health to the king, my lord! Assyria is well, the temples are well, all the king's forts are well. The king, my lord, can be glad indeed.
... Assyria ...
... of Ašpa-bari
I shall write ...
... "
... to the end of days ... Assurbanipal ... I made stand ... like ... I established ... in the land Mušku ... I said: “Whoever removes the ... of Assurbanipal ... I will break the ... of Aššur ... my foot ... to ... ”
5 mares:
The ... whom I ... appointed as deputy (governor) is in charge of the rest of the ... of Aššur-... , the legate of Ki... ; I have appointed him to the deputy (governor) in ...
... before Bel
Month Ab (V), 9th day,
The king will subdue his land; the land Elam will be in his control.
Witness ... ahhe.
The people of Hargayanu have ...
He shall pay 40 (minas of) refined silver and 60 (minas of) pure silver, of the same value as the sun-god's (barley) rations, and shall place (the silver) in the lap of Marduk. He shall pay the sun-god his 30 (minas of) pure silver, and shall place the dagger upon the neck of the lion ...
Witness Nabû-šumu-... , scribe, keeper of the contract.
... they should not hold back
... ;
... ditto, Ṣalam-šarri-iqbi,
... they have removed ... from the top of the ...
... Aššur-etel-šamê-erṣeti-muballissu
The treasurer and the scribe of the palace have sinned against the king's gold and have taken 3 talents of pure gold and 4 talents of unpure gold from the storehouse of the chief victualler. They have turned the gold over to the king's image and the image of the queen mother. The king, my lord, should give orders to the treasurer and the scribe of the palace to give it back in its original amount.
The word of the gods ...
total — the goddess Ištar, the house of Kidmuri.
If the moon is surrounded by a halo, and Regulus stands in it: in that year, women will give birth to male children.
The city Liphur-ilu.
Seal of Sasî, owner of the man being sold.
News of the Babylonians: ...
... my lords in their midst ... I made their ... great, (and) I made their ... splendid. I offered sumptuous pure offerings before them ...
(whether) the Egyptians ...
From Munnabitu.
Ulūlu (VI), the tenth day, eponymy of Banbâ, the second vizier (676 BC).
adjoining ...
In the pass of ...
Witness Ubru-Nabû, keeper of the contract.
I defeated the land of Ḫumbanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš I), the Elamite. I conquered the lands Karalla, Sarda, (and) Kišesim, the cities Kišesim, Ḫarḫar, (and) Madaktu, the lands Media (and) Ellipi, (and) ... I made the Assyrian god Aššur take the road to the land Mannea (... ).
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû'a. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
The god Asara, the goddess Mazah, the Igigi gods, the Anunnaki gods, the Enlil of the gods, the Anunnaki gods, the twins, the three, the four, the lords of the totality of heaven and earth, the twin gods, the gods of ... , the Urimu gods,
Witness Hiriṣayu.
May the lord of kings, two days ... , stay in the city before the king! And may ... in the steppe!
... Esaggil, Babylon and ...
Month ... , xth day, eponym year of Zazaya.
Witness NN, ... of the chariot-fighters.
Now ... ru has written to me:
If the moon at its appearance is red and its left horn is blunt, its right horn pointed: you will defeat the enemy land of the enemy of Adad.
In lieu of 15 shekels of silver for the prebend (of) the ...
(Property) of Šamaš-rēša-uṣur, eunuch of the king.
Palace of Sennacherib, king of Assyria: (This is) the audience gift that Karib-il, king of the land Saba, presented to me. May (the gods) Šamaš, ... , Nabû, (and) Uraš make his name (and) his seed disappear.
... in Der
Ahi-yababa has contracted and bought it for x hundred copper shekels as a lease for the captives of the vizier on the boat. He has given it to the deputy.
an estate of 1 hectare 2 decares adjoining ditto; adjoining Marduk-ereš;
We kept watch on the 29th day; we saw the moon. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king my lord!
in all 6: the 'residences' of ...
... the city Ḫatarikka, Ṣupat
At the beginning of my kingship, I brought about the defeat of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), king of Karduniaš (Babylonia), together with the troops of (the land) Elam, at the battle in Kish. In the midst of that battle he abandoned his camp, fled alone, and (thereby) saved his life. I seized the chariots, wagons, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, and Bactrian camels that he had abandoned in the thick of battle.
to Ilu-šumu-...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-metu-uballiṭ. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk very greatly bless the king, my lord!
... there is a mark on them
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-belu-taqqin. Good health to the king, my lord!
4 minas of silver, 3 togas, 3 tunics: the chief eunuch;
2 ...
... here
Now ... them.
... of the meal;
Month Elul (VI), 20th day, eponym year of Dadi-metu-uballiṭ.
... in the yoke
... he did not exist ... a letter ... the city ... was extensive ... he ... he ... he ... to its foundation ... he ... he ... he ...
... the town of ... -ila'i
... ;
When he has made the ... go out, he says:
Concerning the reinforcements about which the king, my lord, wrote to me, as soon as I have seen the letter, I shall write to the king in the morning, at the beginning of the day, about the campaign.
... we shall send.
... 20 hectares ...
... Assyria
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
On my second campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me and I marched to the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians, a dangerous enemy who since time immemorial had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors. In the high mountains, difficult terrain, I rode on horseback and had my personal chariot carried on (men’s) necks. In very rugged terrain I roamed about on foot like a wild bull.
Witness Ilu-šumu-ke''in, chariot fighter of the governor.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
... concerning ...
Witness Aššur-...
The queen enters: "Come, queen, daughter of the harem!"
Lâbaši-liphur is a competent scribe; he is useful to the king, my lord.
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial audience gift from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
... early morning
... I marched as far as my frontier and I had my feet kissed by the king of Meluḫḫa, the king of the land Hamath, ... , ... , linen garments with multi-colored trim, eunuchs, male singers, female singers, ... , ... horses of the land Muṣri ...
The king asked me: "What is it that you are doing?" I said: "I am doing the work of ... The gods are afraid of Gula of ... Gula of the steppe ...
4 'litres' of honey ... ;
Witness Silim-Aššur, horse trainer.
... ;
Let the king, my lord, send word that their prefects come and stay with me until these logs have been loaded.
From Rašil the older, servant of the king.
total, the commander-in-chief of the left.
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... he gave to Bel ...
134 ... ;
Thus (speaks) the goddess Bēlet-balaṭi, the lady of battle, the warrior of the gods, the mother of those who in the presence of (the god) Aššur, my father, had commanded good deeds (and) had made me attain my wish: “I will put Teumman, the king of the land Elam, who had put his trust in (the god) Aššur, the king of the gods, my father, to shame (and) I will make his troops flee.” She (the goddess Bēlet-b
Twice or thrice, whether by means of a figurine or of anything, the king, my lord, asked his servant about the well-being of the king, my lord, and I have always been attentive to the king, my lord.
Month Adar (XII), 7th day, eponym year of Abi-ram, grand vizier.
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur.
As I have heard, ...
Shamshi-ilu,
The people of (the land of) Sumer were undisciplined;
He (the god Marduk) commanded the restoration of the temple, the renovation of Ekur.
Concerning the news of the king, my lord, I have arrested all my informers and questioned them. The mother of the king, as I was waiting for her, was very angry.
... my border
Tribute from the land of the people of Kilizi.
did not come ...
Shalmaneser, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (I), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of Aššur: builder of Ekur, the temple of the gods.
Concerning the watch about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "NN is keeping the watch of the crown prince" —
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, (or) have changed or altered the proceedings...
Samsi... , his maid, a suckling son,
... his ... , ... my ... , the one who ... my good deeds, ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , Esarhaddon, true shepherd, ... , Akitu House, ...
Breccia, as much as is needed (for making) burzigallu-bowls, was extracted from it with a pick.
... is dark.
... their fields
... the king ...
I have appointed two guards and two ... s in their charge. I have given them the following instructions about their provisions: "Inspect the old stores and give out the ... "
... they have gone ...
Disregard that ... they will catch them and ...
As to what the king of the lands, my lord, wrote: "Go and ... where there is a lot of snow!" —
Your servant Nabû-bel-šumati: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: I have sent my messenger to greet the king, the horses and the troops.
The sun which makes an eclipse (is like) the moon in front of the king; it will make its eclipse pass by.
... fish
A tablet of Aššur-zeru-ibni to Nergal-eṭir. Good health to my brother!
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. The best of health to the king, my lord!
x hectares of field in the town of Šurrani, adjoining the road of Calah and the field of Aya-metunu,
Is the capture, defeat, plunder, (and) loot of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, on the road to ... , by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord?
... the king, our lord,
Witness Batutanu, scribe.
... shall glaze the bricks.
of ...
... I will not relent. The lord ...
Let their messenger come ...
Month ... , 1st day, the moon is visible.
(As for) Uaiteʾ (Iautaʾ), together with his troops, who had not feared the weapons of (the god) Aššur, my lord, they (the gods) brought about their defeat. The god Erra, the warrior, inflicted upon them a heavy loss. He carried off to Babylon (i 5') their young (and) old, their possessions, their property, (and) their flocks, (and) he considered (them) as if (they were) his own. He made the gods Aššur, Sîn,
Like a raging fire, I raged like a wild bull. I put on armor (and) placed a helmet suitable for combat on my head. (vii 10) I took in my hand the merciless weapon(s) of the goddess Dūr-Aššur. Like a fierce wild bull, I charged into the midst of the troops of the four quarters (of the world). I fought with my weapons like (the god) Aššur himself.
in the temple ...
... outside
... fish;
“Should the oxen which are being slaughtered for the purpose of providing cooked meat be killed in their (own) pens?” Favourable.
Marduk, sage of the gods, lord of the great courts, and Anunnaki, the great judge, the god Nergal, the perfect one, the goddess Nusku, the bearer of the holy scepter, the goddess Tašmētu, the spouse of the god Enlil, the lord of the great gods, the goddess Ištar, the foremost in heaven, the heroine of the great gods, the goddess Ereškigal, the spouse of the god Enlil, the great lady, the goddess Ninlil, the
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether the women of the palace or the army of the palace, or any other person, whether male or female, who comes forward and institutes a lawsuit or litigation against me, breaks the contract, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against me, by the command of the god Aššur, he shall not succeed. He shall not have a lawsuit or litigation against me.
Your servant Ina-tešî-eṭir: I would gladly die for the king of the lands, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king of the lands, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
Concerning the ...
... will be placed ...
The former ... of the king, my lord, are ...
I am a dead body. With my heart I pray to you, saying: "Who will save me? The gods hate me. The sun has turned its face from me. They have decreed a terrible fate for me. I am a dead body."
Month of Sī'immê, ... th day, eponym year of ... , governor of ...
... set to ...
to ...
and ... with them ...
... Nabû-killanni
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, may Aššur, Sin, Šamaš, Bel and Nabû call to account the king's gods by (his) name.
Witness Nabû-nammir, ...
Now then I have sent Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, to you with four hundred Assyrian troops. Defeat your enemy and save the people who are with you!
... before me
Witness NN, scribe.
The king, my lord, can be glad.
To the king, my lord: your servant, the foreman of the collegium of ten (scribes) of Arbela. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I am here; ...
52 in all from Arpad;
... are recessed... 3 2-year-olds
I have written ...
To the governor, my lord: your servant Nabû-duru-uṣur. Good health to my lord! The city of Der is well.
... I will go ...
... will become strong and overthrow the cattle of Akkad in the steppe.
Witness NN, scribe.
In the future, in far-off days, may a future ruler renovate its dilapidated section(s) when that temple becomes old and dilapidated. May he anoint with oil my clay inscriptions, make sacrifices, (and) return (them) to their places. (Then) the god Nabû, the august heir, will listen to his prayers.
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
The gods Aššur, Nabû, (and) Marduk granted me a reign without equal and exalted my good reputation to the heights.
Nergal-iddina, a total of 20 persons, servants of Arbailayu —
... to Nineveh ... adjoining the main ...
In the future may a later prince, when those walls become dilapidated and he restores (them), restore my monumental inscriptions and my inscribed name to their places. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
At that time, in my city, Kār-Tukultī-Ninurta, the cult center, the dwelling place of the god Aššur, my lord, I built anew. I named it Eḫursaggalkurkurra, “The Great Mountain of the Abode of the God Aššur, my lord.” Moreover, I deposited my monumental inscriptions.
... s have been slashed in the house ...
... the king, my lord
... I said to him
Zeru-ukin has paid it in full to Ahu-iddina.
... the king, my lord ...
to NN ...
If the moon in Iyyar (II) becomes visible on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
Witness ... -gamil. Witness Arakki.
... I filled ... (and) ... I ... the lands Musri, Patiru, ... I conquered ... the land Karduniaš (Babylonia) ... I ... inside ...
1, the daughter of the chief ... ;
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Witness Isbu, butcher.
They have told me that the house of Huhhitu and the threshing floor have been plundered. They have given me a golden statue, but I have not given it back to them.
Aššur-ila'i;
cure of ...
1, ... ;
... field ... in Šabirešu — not ...
It shall increase by a fourth.
Witness Aššur-le'i, ...
Šamaš-ila'i, chief ... , has contracted and bought it from Lu-balaṭ, ...
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, wise prince, circumspect ruler, (i 5) who loves the work of artisans, the one who is attentive to the ways of the (divine) assembly, the one who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the gods,
x male sheep — of Se'-lahutu, the chief shepherd, son of the commander-in-chief;
Eight ... s of ... have delivered ... to the king, my lord."
(As for) Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, (my) hostile brother who had planned to take away Assyria for himself, he became frightened on the day of battle and combat and, during the night, he fled alone.
Your servant Hamatpy: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to my lord:
Month Kislev (IX), 3rd day, eponym year of Sennacherib.
Witness ... -zeri. Witness ... , palace woman.
5 cans of beer;
These gods are loyal to Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, and Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, and his brothers, sons by the same mother as Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, and the rest of the offspring of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, (and) they will speak favorably of him (and) his offspring before his enemy.
I shall wait for him ... ; afterwards, I shall go to my presence.
At that time the temple of the god Nabû, which Adad-nārārī (I), son of Šamšī-Adad (I), king of Assyria, a king who preceded me, had built, became old and I removed its dilapidated section(s). I dug down to the bottom of the foundation pit with picks and (... ) I reached bedrock. I built (and) completed (it) from its foundation(s) to its crenellations. I roofed it with long beams of cedar. I ... its structure and
... I made them enter the city Gabbaru, which is inside (the territory of) Sumer.
... are left over.
... , 23 persons; NN, cohort commander;
Witness Remanni-Adad, carpenter.
From Dur-Šarruken.
3 lumps of copper;
Concerning Aššur-rēša-iši ...
Witness Nergal-šarru-uṣur, 'third man.'
... are at the disposal of the 'base of the throne.'
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods:
shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
are staying in Sadiru. He says: "... we have been sent to ... "
One of the officials who helps him with his tax collection — the king himself placed a golden bowl of ... water on the table of his father, and one of his father's servants is now kissing the ground before Bel and Nabû, and they are drinking wine. The wine for the palace is now ready, and they are drinking it.
... as it is said in the village of the god Nīnurta: "... Iqbi-Bel is their spokesman" —
before the gods ...
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, question him.
3 ... ;
You offer a libation bowl before Šamaš, (while) he sings, “... ”
(               Break               )
May they make evil and wicked things surround you like fire.
... in the hands of my messenger
The king, my lord, said: "It is a bad omen. It is not of the land of Assyria, (rather) it is of the land of the Arameans." And (as to) the extispicy, it is unfavorable.
Witness Pan-Issar-lamur.
... will come and ...
I built Eḫulḫul, the cella of the goddess Ištar, my lady, which is inside Eanna, which a king of the past (who had come) before me had built, and I made its construction more splendid than before. I made the site larger than before and (re)confirmed the offerings. I made the ziggurrat higher than before.
Witness Nabû-eriba, deputy team-commander.
You shall not sin against these treaties of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, which he has concluded on behalf of Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, and his brothers, sons by the same mother as Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, and the rest of the offspring of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord,
Haya, Kusu in the side room, the Furnace in the courtyard, Kittu in the courtyard above the well, Ea-šarru, Damkina, Išhara, Qingu, Malik, Uqurutu: total (of gods) in the house of Ea-šarru.
I built a house in the citadel of Nineveh behind the temple of the gods Sîn and Šamaš. I dedicated (it) to the kingly son of Esarhaddon, my lord, ...
From this day, the 10th day of this month, the month ... , to the ... th day of the month ... of the coming year, for 30 days and nights, my stipulated term —
Disregard that they (may) come to a standstill at the crossing of the river or at the city ...
Witness Balasî, servant of ...
which they killed ...
He did not tell me anything.
x, ... , 30 oxen, a string of beasts
... rings of gold ...
An estate of 40 (hectares of) land in the town of ... ;
Remittance that Nabû-šumu-iškun gave to Bel-duri, governor, and that Bel-duri gave to Šakil-Aya.
... you did not know. Your ... and your heart were completely devoted to me. No one has ever seen or heard anything like this from me.
The 12th day: he will be shut up in a prison.
Banaya;
If he does not pay, it shall increase 1 homer per (unit of) 10 seahs per day.
Month ... , xth day, eponym year of Manzarnê, ... of Kar-Apladad.
84 pairs of sandals for 2 minas and 53 shekels of silver from Kummuh — the merchants have not yet paid for them.
3 2-seah jars of hinhinu-seeds;
his sons ...
... according to ...
Month Shebat (XI), 1st day, eponym year of Zazaku.
I shall bring the treaty tablet and read it to him.
... previous ...
... 10 ...
The man whose name is written in this oblong tablet and placed before your great divinity, who has been humiliated before Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, your servant —
Witness Namû.
I put to the sword the population of the city Ḫirimmu, a dangerous enemy, and I did not spare a single one. I hung their corpses on poles and placed (them) around the city. I reorganized that district (and) imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the gods of Assyria, my lords.
2 cuts of shoulder from an ox of the temple of Dagan — of the chief cupbearer.
I gave ...
Month Adar (XII), 18th day.
Who is taking away the barley? The king, my lord, should write.
... to ... In the king's holy mouth may I not come to shame and may I not be disgraced in the king my lord's presence! May the king, my lord, let me live and may I not die! May the king, my lord, take care of his servants and may I not be neglected in the presence of the Babylonians, my brothers!
Puzî;
... ditto,
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
... adjoining the road that leads to the village of ...
... chariot, 2 ...
This is its interpretation.
... is established.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, should send Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the rab mūgi, to Ikkalû,
Ištar, lady ... , ...
May Palil, the foremost lord, let disease, exhaustion and hunger take hold of you.
Total 4 ...
... in my presence
adjoining the field of Gambulayu,
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. The best of health to the king, my lord!
News of the city of Venus: he is (still) there. The king, my lord, wrote to me; Mukin-zeri ...
On the xth day he returned and sent his messenger to Parsumaš. My messenger, when he went to Bit-Bunakki, said to the ... : "Umman-menanu, the herald of Barsil, has taken 30 (talents of) flour and sent it to the son of Daltâ. The king of Elam is coming to Bit-Bunakki; bring his 30 chariots with the king to Bit-Bunakki!"
Now ...
9 Kassite women;
As to the Qutian chariot owners about whom the king, my lord, wrote me: "Ask (them)!" — there are no bread (or) seed corn of theirs.
1 of obsidian;
... barley in ...
2 homers of wheat — the gods ...
Let the governor of Calah send word that they give me a cart in the district of Ubasê so I can drag the cart.
shall place 10 minas of silver (and) x minas of gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
35 homers, the wine master;
From Pan-Marduk.
1 mina, Nabû-... ;
40 ditto, hallam;
The nobles who had run away and had been living in the mountains and the people of the city Gannanu had been plotting to do battle. They were saying: "...
To the vizier, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. Good health to the vizier, my lord!
Witness Ilumma-le'i.
6 oxen, 40 hectares of arable land near the city of Harran, 100 hectares under cultivation therein.
... is finished
... weapon" is "to be pointed."
Šamaš-šumu-ukin is doing very well; he is (now) performing the rites for Ereškigal for the crown prince. We are not performing them for Šamaš-šumu-ukin; what is it that the king, my lord, commands?
To the king, my lord: your servant Šulmu-beli. Good health to the king, my lord!
Arbak of the land Arnaši,
or in ... ,
Witness Zababa-eriba, 'third man.'
in ...
Concerning the tribute of the king, my lord, ... the king, my lord, ...
Aššur will not ...
... the sign ...
NN, farmer; 1 woman; 1 house; ... the town of Balihu.
x, in the charge of Huda-Dada,
... Sivan (III) ...
... are in front of them.
... the governors
their ... s in ...
The king should know that your servants have been sold for money.
... the goddess Bēlat-ekallim
... I will go to Sūḫu
... of Nabû-šarru-ka''in ...
... before ... Assurbanipal ... to his entirety ... his wrath ...
I shall finish the city as the king, my lord, commanded. I will then bring the men into it.
... this
... to the sons of Zazî
1, open chariotry;
I have been waiting for the king, my lord, since the time of my father.
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number and I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, fortified cities, together with the small(er) settlements in their environs (and) the district of the land Bīt-Barrû in its entirety, and I added (this area) to the territory of Assy
Guzana
If a star stands in the left of the moon: the king of Akkad will exercise world rule.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
x ... , first fruits;
... , a total of x persons,
... Arbela
x talents 4 1/2 minas of scarlet dye for red wool.
a cup of ... ;
... concerning the Assyrians ...
... they will bless him
10 shekels of silver belonging to Urdu-Aya, at the disposal of Kitti-muti.
... ayu, governor;
Month of the Open Gate, eponym year of Atar-ili, governor of Lahiru.
10 minas of silver ...
... I ... the god Šamaš ... I brought back ... my foot ...
Now that he has run away from ... , he has come ... ; the chief ...
... the king, my lord, ...
Witness Haldi-naṣir, royal bodyguard.
Your servant Salamâ: I would gladly die for the palace of the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: The land of the king is well.
I decorated them (the palatial halls) in a splendid fashion. I adorned them with silver and copper knobbed nails. I adorned the arches, friezes, and all of their copings with baked bricks (glazed in the color of) obsidian (and) lapis lazuli.
... Saya, Marduk-šumu-uṣur. Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of ...
of Ammu-la-Ba'al ...
If Venus in Ab (V) descends darkly to the horizon and sets: there will be a fall of Elam ...
in the days of ...
... quickly
May Anu, Enlil and Ea, the gods of heaven and earth, make your heart happy, and may they grant you a life of old age, extreme old age, in Esaggil, which you love.
The rest of the ...
From Nabû-iqbi.
x, herald of the steppe, 14 talents, 30 (men);
... they seized and ...
... -dammiq, his son,
Witness Aššur-le'i, 'third man.'
Issar-ša...
The (king) who sits on the throne of the crown prince's household, the household in charge of the storehouse, is not of Remanni-Aššur or of Aššur-rēša-iši.
Milki-lurmi,
... ; Si... ;
He made the wife of his palace enter into Cutha and Elam as a married woman.
That which is (written) upon the skin of the necklace of the king, around the neck.
The chariot ...
... these ...
... the king, my lord
... rebellion
... the ... -man of ... is to blame for ...
1 sheep for ablution — of the ...
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
May the king act as he deems best.
Sagibi-šarri, ... ;
Kaštaritu, city lord of Kar-Tiglath-pileser, will capture (and) kill the Sapardean, the Cimmerian, the Mede, the Mannean, the Scythian, (and) any other enemy.
... house ...
At the beginning of my kingship, in my first regnal year, when the god Aššur, king of the gods, sat on my royal throne, the god Anu, the supreme lord, placed in my hands the scepter, his throne, the rod, (and) the divine emblems, and he entrusted to me the entirety of the land of Sumer and Akkad. Through the wisdom that the gods, the creatresses, gave me, I learned proper judgment and administered correctly the extensive land of Sumer and Akkad.
On the first day ... may Nergal, the lord of the crown, smite him and ... ; may I, the king of the lands, the king of Babylon, take away his ... and put his feet in iron fetters.
... seah of 8 'litres'
In the unsubmissive districts they took up a position for armed conflict. I set up my camp at the foot of Mount Ilimeru, a rugged mountain. The people living in the district were frightened by the clangor of my battle array and ... the people ... they fled ...
Disregard that ...
(As for) the one who alters (my) work, may the god Aššur, my lord, overthrow his sovereignty (and) afflict his land with famine.
I shall lay it down ...
The king, my lord, has remembered the one who praises his name. For many years, I have been praising his name daily. I have been glorifying his name. What have I received in return? I have been dressed in robes, (but) what have I received?
Written according to its original and collated.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
... the king, my lord, should ...
... Bit-Kisiyah
... palace ... he ... the people of the cities ... not to Nineveh ... between ... just as in ... inside ... the land of the Lullumu ... their ...
... as far as the river
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "What news of the son of Zerî is there?" He has gone to Puqudu and returned from there. He is in the town of Uruk. My messenger has gone to Sapia and met him. I shall send a detailed report to the king, my lord, as soon as he returns.
... we kept watch
In the middle surface of the 'finger' a long design is drawn toward the left.
x minas of silver, of Il-dalâ, deputy of Haurina.
Whoever in the future, at any time, comes forward, whether Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver, or his sons or grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Remanni-Adad, shall place one talent of refined silver and one mina of pure gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Witness Nabû-šezib, chariot driver.
... I said to him, "...
Written according to the original and collated.
Total 589 horses, 8 mules.
Palace of Sargon (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad.
Assurbanipal, the crown prince of the Succession Palace, ... , is making an insurrection and rebellion against you, O Šamaš, great lord.
If Venus stays in a stable position: the days of the king will be long.
The pinnacle of my power is the city Kalḫu, which I conquered in its entirety by means of warfare and conquest. Moreover, I have destroyed its tablets and written my own name upon them.
where is ... ?
14 ... ;
Nabû-šar-ahhešu;
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, scribe.
... I have been waiting for ... ; should I be allowed to enter, I would ... in Akkad. If the eunuch ... , we would be able to do the work. But they have been delaying ... and have been making ... , and have not given ...
Now they have cut them into shape and are  finishing to glaze them. My father said: "Two ...
In the second year, he puts silver on the corn heap, and redeems his land.
8 'litres' ... ;
Now then the whole city is united against Ariye ... in accordance with what the delegate is saying.
I am sending ...
And ... for ... , how should we do it? For the qirsu of the temple of Ištar, for the ziggurrat of the temple of the Sebetti, for the temple of Adad of the ziggurrat, for the temple of Adad of the ziggurrat, for the temple of the Seven Gods, for the temple of the god Adad of the ziggurrat, for the temple of the god Adad of the ziggurrat, for the temple of the god Adad of the ziggurrat, for the temple of the god Adad of
The Medes ...
I took hostages, (and) I received from them chariots, troops, (and) equipment that could not be counted. I marched to the land Elam. I conquered, plundered, destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire the cities Libê, their fortified city, (and) Sūrara, (a city that is) between Mount Urikni, Mount Arunu, (and) Mount Etini, mighty mountains. I carried off their booty, possessions, herds, (and) flocks. I did not leave a single
You draw a design on the ground, ... , pour water, and sing: “The best man is the best woman.” You fill a cup of a seah of water with aromatics and give it to them.
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-šumu-ukin. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I had my camp pitched at the city Sūḫu, a place of great difficulty, like the mountain Amanus. I had my camp pitched at the city Sūḫu, a place of great difficulty, like the mountain Amanus. I had my camp pitched at the city Sūḫu, a place of great difficulty, like the mountain Amanus. I had my camp pitched at the city Sūḫu, a place of great difficulty, like the mountain Amanus. I had my camp pitched at the city Sūḫu, a place of great difficulty,
Se'-dalâ,
... of the report of the king ...
Witness Mannu-ki-Ninua, ...
Now then
If the moon and sun are in opposition: there will be truth in the land, and the son will speak the truth with his father.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether these men or their sons or grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Kakkullanu and his sons,
Witness Nabû-šallimšunu.
News of ...
(As for) Umba-LAGABUA, who sat on the throne of the land Elam in opposition to Ummanaldašu (Ḫumban-ḫaltaš III), he heard about the conquest of the city Bubilu, a city upon which he relied, and fear fell upon him. He flew away like a bird to inaccessible mountains.
I have sent ... from the town ...
To the goddess Ištar, the lady of the lands, the most valiant of the gods, the 'water' that controls the ... , the ... , the one who makes young men lie prostrate, ... , the one who makes the ... to flourish, ... , the one who makes the ... to prosper, ... , the one who makes the ... to prosper, ... , the one who makes the ... to flourish, ... , the one who makes the ... to prosper, ... , the one who makes the ... to flourish, ... , the one who makes the ... to flourish, ... ,
On the 18th day the king went down to the House of God.
... many ... s have been killed in the well.
To the king of the lands, my lord: your servant Bel-ušezib. May Bel, Nabû and Šamaš bless the king, my lord!
... Marduk-aplu-iddina from ...
x straight garments, ditto, the edging ... ;
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
The city lord ... : "Why did you plunder the houses?" — when I was with him, his houses were not plundered."
his scribe.
... will go
I shall not go to the king my lord's audience. He will enter my presence and stand at my right and left. Let the king my lord write to him that the house of Uqayu is exempt, and that he should stand in the presence of the chief cupbearer, and do whatever he says.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Total 71 seahs — for Nineveh.
Disregard that the day is overcast and it has rained...
The men ...
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
... Ištar ...
Nabû-šarru-uṣur says: "...
Seal of Nabû-šallim-ahhe, son of Pan-Nabû-ṭemi,
If Venus comes close to Jupiter: the king of the Westland will experience a reign of long days; ... ; the enemy land of the king will expand; ...
In Kislev (IX), on the 15th day, let Nergal take up a plank bed and lie down on it, (while) he sings, “She is taken up by a plank bed.”
... of obsidian;
The money is paid completely. That woman is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
total, 6 men.
May Anu, father of the gods, break his scepter (and) may Illil, lord of the destinies, decree a fate without equal for him. May the days of his reign be long (and) may his years be many.
1 vat of soup from Arbṣu;
200, ditto, kirrutu-meal;
Witness ...
before ...
... Now ...
... , gardener of the vineyard ... ;
If on the 16th day the moon and sun are seen together: one king will send hostile messages to another; the king will be shut up in his palace for the length of a month; the step of the enemy will be set towards his land; the enemy will march around victoriously.
If a star flares up at its left horn: there will be an eclipse of the king of the Westland; his land will diminish.
The gate of the upper city ...
... his people
This night the moon was surrounded by a halo, Scorpius stood in it.
10 hectares, the town ... ;
Sasu, his servant —
... field in Kuluna
Jupiter stood in the sky for a number of days.
From Bulluṭu.
Kamanu, his servant, a Tabalean —
... saw ...
... ;
With joy and jubilation, I entered Babylon, the cult center of the great gods. I inspected his (Nabonidus’) magnificent cult centers and, (then) I made an offering (and) presented my gift(s).
... the xth day: let him give bread to the hungry. Whoever ...
2 ditto ditto, the fringe knotted, 1 1/4 mina;
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have seen fear and terror at night, or jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, conqueror of the land of the Qutu, all enemies, subduer of the land Katmuḫu, conqueror of the lands of the Uqumanu, Purulumzu, (and) the land of the Qutu, all together four quarters, who marched at the command of the god Aššur and the great gods with the support of the god Aššur and the great gods, and (who) had no opponent in the four quarters, (
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria; conqueror from the passes of Mount Habruru to the land Gilzānu; crossed the Tigris from the source to the land Šubria; conquered from the opposite bank of the Tigris to the land
... who did not submit to the kings, my ancestors, and did not send his message to them; ... the great host of Aššur, my lord, and he sent (word) to destroy his envoys, who had come to Calah, before me;
Witness Ilu-remanni.
... Milki-suri... , his wife
The adjutant(s) who brought them in and imposed corvée duty on them —
The 2nd day you ... from me
Month Tammuz (IV), 22nd day; (performed) in Adian.
Month ... , 8th day, eponym year of Aššur-da''inanni.
Total 78 men ...
Tribute of Kutāšpi of the city Kummuḫu, Raḫiānu (Rezin) of the land Damascus, Meniḫimme of the city Samaria, Ḫirumme of the city Tyre, Sibitti of the city Byblos, Uriakki of the land Que, Pisīri of the city Carchemish, Enīl-Marduk of the city Hamath, Pana-Marduk of the city Samʾal, Tarḫulara of the land Gurgum, Suʾalli
Written according to its original and collated.
My brother has written to me from my men: 'The 'third man' is assembling the rest of the men in my presence, but the rest of the men of the city lords are with him.'
The base of the middle part is 'bound.' The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number. The heart of the ram is normal. Check-up...
... I said: "...
1 ring, of 9 mares:
... them.
... to his brother ...
The servants of the king are in the ... ; they should be appointed to the governorship of ...
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, have jumbled the oracle query in my mouth, or changed (or) altered the proceedings...
Now ...
... have fled
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ahhe-eriba. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
La-qepu, ... ;
... ;
The king, my lord, should not be concerned about it.
Let the king ask the deputy of ... : "Why did the king deport me? Let him be held accountable for these days that you have kept me here!"
Witness Banitu. Witness Urda-Nanaya.
The 7th day is good, the 8th day ...
The god Aššur, the god Šamaš, the god Adad, the god Ber, ... , the god Aššur, my lord, the great gods, who love his priesthood, may they ... to the heavens and netherworld forever ... may they make firm the foundation of his reign ... may they make his dominion greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises.
To the king, my lord: your servant Šarru-ila'i. Good health to the king, my lord!
... the king's men
Balasî, ...
and the winged feet of ...
Witness NN.
... the king, my lord
Witness Ibašši-ilani, son of Nergal-ila'i.
... of bronze
of the king, my lord, ...
Uasî, son of Ta'lâ, gardener; Našuh-dilini, 3 women: a total of 3 people.
Gygis, king of the land Lullumuna, a barbarian, who did not respect the treaty (sworn) by the kings, my ancestors, and did not honor my royal command, abandoned his royal residence during a (violent) uprising and fled afar. (vii 10) The god Aššur (and) the goddess Babu, who love Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, the favorite of (the god) Aššur, the king of the gods, lord of lords, grasped his feet and made him
Who is this man who is making false claims and sending these words to the king, my lord? I will call him to account before my eyes.
I sent my official (and) governors against them (and) they conquered the land Ḫalili. They surrounded, captured, (and) plundered the city Qirbit, his fortified city. They cut down the date palm(s) of that city and set fire to it.
... Third extispicy...
an estate of 8 decares of field adjoining the side road of Sairi, adjoining the field of Bel-ibni,
Concerning Šarru-emuranni about whom the king, my lord, gave me orders, I said: "Your horses and men must not desert him; bring him into the presence of the king!"
20 hectares of arable land, 10 under cultivation therein.
x mules from Kilizi:
To the king, my lord: your servant PN. Good health to the king, my lord!
The scholar ... together with the inhabitants of the city Mugisu ...
... his ...
... he should lay out the garments and put on the headgear.
“Ea Is the One Who Controls the Deluge”: the Gate of the Rising Sun. “Deluge Is My Weapon”: the Gate of Kalkal.
... to your aid which ...
I have written to the king, my lord, about the 260 horses and 13 small soldiers. The king, my lord, should ask the 277 horses and 15 men in their charge; they are not equipped. Let the king, my lord, ask the scribe in his presence.
I am telling Belšunu: "Bring me soldiers and keep watch for me!"
which in the palace of the king ...
Adad-nārārī, king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, son of Arik-dīn-ili, king of Assyria, son of Enlil-nārārī (who was) also king of Assyria:
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
From Rašil the older, servant of the king.
All this is from the beginning of the year.
Total 160 tables, consumption.
until ...
... the king ...
the snake" ...
x shekels of silver upon it ...
... to the king, my lord
From Balasî.
... to the king
... to the feet
1 writing-board ...
horse trainers,
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the priest should go to the cella of Marduk ...
... did not go ... His garments became tattered. They brought him to (the palace), (where) he died.
I wrote ...
... which he had previously built ...
... them ... to the temple ...
The lower part is elevated ...
The vineyard of the regular offerings of Aššur and Mullissu:
And since the chief tailor has been killed, the king ... , but nobody has told (him) whether he should be killed or spared.
... and the head of the lung are normal...
The gods Aššur and my gods have provided me with success. Where have I gone (wrong)? Have I sinned in Bet-Bunakki?
As for me, Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, the performer of this work, when the gods living in heaven looked at me with pleasure and ordered the conquest of all lands, they (the gods) entrusted me with the defeat of the lands Qedar, Mannea, Que, Ḫilakku, (and) Philistia, and the land Tyre, which had not bowed down to my yoke, and they (the gods) allowed me to achieve my heart’s desire.
Witness Aššur-reṣuwa, eunuch, scribe of the queen.
... their harvest
Let the king, my lord, write me (about) it.
You ... the ... and say: “... ”
of the weapon ...
Witness Šamaš. Witness Nergal.
For the god Aššur, father of the gods, the great lord, his lord:
and Nabû-ušallim ...
I, Nabonidus, king of Babylon, the one who built Enunmaḫ, the exalted temple of the great gods, am the one who (re)confirmed the regular offerings for them.
The 'third man' of the chariot ...
4 talents of iron, purchased from the ironsmith of the Inner City, whose name is ... , for one mina of silver by the (mina) of Harran.
... house ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
The king, my lord, has also given ... to the son of Dakuru. The king, my lord, has said: "...
We have sent a messenger to the Inner City and Arbela; the king, my lord, should question the messenger.
saying: "The earlier one was ... "
NN, shepherd; in all x persons — the town of Til-U... , in the district of the city of Sarugi.
Witness Zarutî, cohort commander.
Merodach-Baladan ...
... -ibni, farmer, his servant —
Witness Abd-Ramman, ...
You are in your palace. Really, it is you who are to blame for the plundered ... of your son. You are to perform the ritual before Ninurta.
The king, my lord, should know (this). They spoke to me in his presence thus: "As long as I live, I shall not give (any) of the captives to the king, my lord."
Month Tishri (VII), ... th day, eponym year of Nabû-kenu-uṣur.
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
(As for) the one who alters my handiwork, may the gods Aššur (and) Adad, the great gods, glare at him angrily and make his name (and) his seed disappear from the land!
Witness Asî.
The engraver who was ordered to ... , has not yet returned ...
Witness Paqaha, village manager.
Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Concerning the fortress about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "I have received tribute from ... , Ṣalaya, ... , (and) Sapia ... ; ... in our presence" — as the king, my lord, commanded, I have received tribute from them.
... come! The mayors
all of it ...
... they did not do their work
10 ... ;
... it is a word ...
... months
Ditto by Ištar of Nineveh and Ištar of Arbela!
In the future, may one of the kings, my descendants, whom (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar nominate for ruling over the land and people, renovate its dilapidated section(s) when that wall becomes old and dilapidated. May he find an inscribed object bearing my name, (viii 10') anoint (it) with oil, make an offering, (and) return (it) to its place.
Witness Aplu-uṣur, enemy of Bel-ša-iqbi.
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Now the messengers of the sons of Mukin-zeri have gone to Puqudu; ...
If the sun rises and its light is dim: ...
Witness Nuhšaya, porter.
You set up a pair of tubes before Šamaš, make a flour/incense-offering, pour oil, honey, beer and wine, and sing, “... ”
... your mangu skin disease ...
Month ... , xth day, eponym year of Šulmu-... , governor of ...
2 ... ;
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
As to what you wrote to me: "How do you treat the servants of the king, my lord, when they send me (messages)?" — I send them (messages) in the same way. I write to the king, my lord, as follows: "The king, my lord, has become angry with me. I am sending x ... to you. I shall not give the Phrygian to you until one of these men whom I am sending to you has brought (a message) from the king, my lord."
(As for) Nabû-naʾid (and) Bēl-ēṭir, sons of Nabû-šuma-ēreš, the šandabakku (governor of Nippur) whose father, the one who had engendered them, had fled to the land Akkad (and) had grasped the feet of the lord of the land Akkad — (as for) Nabû-šuma-ēreš, who had fled from the land Gambulu to Assyria (and) had grasped the feet of the lord of the
Bel-iqišanni,
Witness NN. Witness Barruqu.
I have written to Auriga ...
Witness Quili.
all to ...
Concerning the farmer, the shepherd and the ...
In Tishri (VII) the watch of the moon is (for) me.
all this, of Aššur-ayyali.
who ... ed you ...
The people are scattered and their houses ...
The king mounts the rikshaw ...
A tablet of the palace supervisor to Indabiya and Uraš-... , my sons.
I wrote to you ...
Nabû-eriba, son of Nabû-dammiq, ...
Silver is his skull.
Total 23 horses,
Month Ab (V), 18th day, eponym year of NN.
After the king, my lord, has sat on the throne, Bel-ahhe-riba ... will come from ... and serve the king, my lord.
... the governors ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-šumu-ka''in. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and DN bless the king, my lord!
The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number. Check-up...
You shall not cast aside the wording of this document, nor alter the wording of the treaty of Assurnasirpal, king of Assyria, which he has made for the sons of his (own) house, nor remove Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, from the throne of Assyria, nor make common cause with Šamaš-šumu-ukin, his brother, nor give him the kingship of Babylon, nor exercise kingship over the land of Sumer and Akkad, nor make him greater than Esarhaddon, king of
They shall pay at the threshing floor in the city of Argasu. If they do not, it shall increase 5 seahs per homer.
1 silver tribute bowl:
By the command of the god Aššur, I built a city, named it Kār-Mēr-Bēl-ilāni, (and) established therein the residence of the god Bēl (Marduk) forever. I laid its foundations on top of the ruins of the city Kār-Mēr-Bēl-ilāni, which a former king had built.
NN, ditto ... ;
... today
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why is it that they are giving out presents to one another but not to the lady who is to be married?"
corn tax ...
The king stands up, ... The singer intones to the Anunnaki gods:
Nabû-mušeṣi, deputy of the chief scribe;
I have seen the moon, and the sun has become dark.
... I said to my lord:
... the gate of the Firmament ...
they are making ...
... I have been sent ...
... who
As to the gold for the fingernail (and) the pomegranate, about which the king, my lord, wrote me,
I said to him: "Bring me from among your servants those who are willing to serve me, and I will bring the rest of them."
The dais of destiny of the god Aššur, within it he (the god Aššur) decreed my destiny; he made me greater than (those of) all of the kings, my ancestors, and he allowed me to achieve everything that I desired. He made the image of my royal majesty (and) the representation of their divine majesties greater than (those of) all of the kings who sit on (royal) daises.
Witness Nabû-balassu-iqbi, baker.
The money is paid completely. That field, house, threshing floor, garden and well are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Witness NN, ... of the central city.
... they made an eclipse in the morning
If the Old Man star comes close to the top of the moon and stands there: the king will become angry with his land, and there will be wailing in his land.
... garden ...
their tents ...
... Aššur-šarru-uṣur
To the king, my lord: your servant Mannu-ki-Adad. Good health to the king, my lord!
... them
Concerning what Bel-iddina said in the presence of the king, my lord: "... s to the deputy ...
Witness NN, 'third man' of the chariotry.
On the 30th day the moon disappeared; the king will say: "This is an evil sign." On the 27th day the moon disappeared; on the 29th day the moon stood in the sky; and on the 30th day it disappeared. For four days it stood in the sky; on the 4th day it did not disappear.
Ditto, ditto; may they smear oil and honey on you, and may you anoint yourself with cedar oil, your sweet balsam.
to the king, my lord, ...
... , a total of x persons,
Month ... , xth day, eponym year of Sagab (651).
... fish;
Seal of Bur-... ,
Nabû-balassu-iqbi;
... this ...
Why, when the boat is in the middle of the river, do they assemble and take the road? When the river is in the Inner City, why ... ?
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... the Gambulians
architect ...
2, Il-ba... , ... Witness Ba...
... the goddesses Bēlet-ilī, ... , Ḫaya, ...
Remanni-Issar has bought them for money for the journey to Kar-Aššur, and has taken them with him.
O Lord, exalted Marduk, king of Sippar, the one who loves justice, look with pleasure upon this work and may a good word for me be set upon your lips!
... entered ... , (and) was at ease.
Disregard that ... for the heart of the troops ...
... is the refuge of ...
Your servant, the šandabakku: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! May Enlil, Ninurta, and Nusku bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
If the moon becomes visible in Sivan (III) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
Witness Nabû-na'id, ditto. Ditto Nabû-naṣir, palace farmer.
The overseer of the levy imposes (it) upon him, and the gods take it away in the divination.
Sanini, who ... to ... , has paid the son of Sasî 1 1/2 minas of gold for ... and taken 50 ... from him. He has given ... to NN.
They have made a golden statue of the goddess Ningal, my mistress, and have made it stand upon a lion. They have made ... golden ... s of the upper and lower parts of the statue of the god Ningal, ... golden ... s, ... golden ... s, ... golden ... s, ... golden ... s, ... golden ... s, ... golden ... s, ... golden ... s, ... golden ... s, ... golden ... s, ... golden ... s, ... golden ... s, ... golden ... s, ... golden ... s, ... golden ... s, ... golden ... s, ... golden ...
If the moon and sun are in opposition: the king of the land will widen his understanding.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
... and in his first year he ... ed the kingship of Babylon.
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
I conquered the lands Sallia (and) Lulê in their entirety (and) the land Alzu.
All is well with ...
... the fort ...
Ri(b)a... , king of ...
Witness Šumma-ilani.
1 prayer bowl ditto;
Moreover, (as for) Ṣidqâ, the king of the city Ashkelon who had not bowed down to my yoke, I forcibly removed the gods of his father’s house, together with his (own) gods, and took (them) to Assyria.
... of the Li'tamu ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
Now then I am sending Nabû-eṭir, my messenger, to the Palace to speak with my father. If he does not return alive, I shall write to the Palace in full.
who dwells in his cool, dark water, cannot be disturbed, has no rival, is the great king, the perfect one, the king of kings, the king of the gods, the lord of lords, the one who rules over all, the one who is praised by the gods, the one who is feared by the gods, the one who is loved by the gods, the one who is revered by the gods, the one who is praised by the god Sîn, the one who is feared by the god Adad, the one who is loved by the god Ea, the one who is rever
5 talents, the New Palace of Calah;
I appointed over them Bēl-ibni, a son of a rab banî (and) a scion of Šuanna (Babylon), whom I raised on my (own) knee(s) to the kingship of the land of Sumer and Akkad.
1 head-cloth of Nabû-ahhe-eriba, the delegate of Tyre;
Month Iyyar (II), 10th day, eponym year of Zazaya, governor of Arpad.
(As for) the Cimmerians, a dangerous enemy who had never feared my ancestors, (and) had not grasped the feet of my royal majesty, with the support of (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar, my lords, he (Gyges) clamped (them) in manacles, handcuffs, (and) neck-stocks and sent (them) before me.
On my third campaign, I marched against Ahēšēri, the king of the land Mannea. By the command of the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Nergal, (and) Nusku, I entered into the land Mannea (and) I conquered (and) plundered twenty-one of his fortified cities, together with the settlements in their environs,
... will be seen.
Month of the god Sîn, first day, eponym year of Ša-Adad-nīnu.
Witness Bel-abu'a.
La-... , ... of Šep-... , has contracted and bought (said property) for 40 ...
7 big loaves;
which are in the river, near the house of Uargihtu, 370 of them have been pulled out.
shall place 10 minas of refined silver (and) one mina of pure gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
At that time, the temple of Aššur, my lord, which kings who preceded me had previously built, had become dilapidated and old. I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I laid its foundation on top of limestone and secured its brickwork. I built the temple of Aššur, my lord, according to its original appearance. Moreover, I built the towers of the gates of the stronghold and the towers which are on the other side of the canal, which had not been built previously. I built the towers of the stronghold according to
... the Babylonians ...
The singer washes his hands, performs a sheep offering, burns a female kid, and sings, “The king is my lord.” The singer intones, “The king is my lord.”
Iqisu,
Go and ... !"
Witness NN, royal bodyguard.
I am Mullissu ...
... the gods of the king. If ... , the king ...
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur, eunuch.
Concerning what the king, my lord, said: "... on the 10th, the 11th, the 15th and the xth to ...
May your gardens be ... !"
Adad-apla-iddina, son of the goddess Ninisina, king of Babylon, the one who renovates Esagil, the one who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the gods, am I.
The king, my lord, should not say: "He did not do it."
On the 16th day, at around 11:00, Abi-rahî came up from Malak and entered the city of Adian. Šamaš of ...
... terror ... they were frightened ... they took to hiding ... weapons of your great divinity they lifted up ... they became frightened at the mention of my name (and) bowed down at my feet.
Witness NN.
In the future may a later prince, when that wall becomes old and dilapidated, restore it. May he anoint with oil my monumental inscriptions and inscribed name, make sacrifices, (and) return (them) to their places. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-aplu-iddina.
Concerning the saplings about which the king, my lord, wrote to me, they should be trimmed and checked. The new saplings which will be available in Dur-Šarruken in the month of Adar (XII) should be trimmed and checked as well.
Bir-ramman ...
The merchant from Carchemish killed his servants, but I did not let (him) live. I have given back to the king, my lord, the property of Mullissu, the Lady of Kidmuri, and the mothers who are carrying (the babies).
I had a foundation inscription written in my name and the praise of (the god) Aššur, the great lord, my lord, written on it and I deposited (it) in the foundation(s) of the palace, my lordly residence.
Seal of Nabû-riba-ahhe, scribe.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
"... , chief eunuch of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also king of Assyria.
x of the extispicy corpus, 3 seahs of chick-peas, 3 'litres' of lentils, spiced bread;
2,000 ... ;
(As for) Šumma-ilu, son of Aramu, the king of the gods, the recruitment officer of the king, he stands before me.
a ... ;
The wild bull is the lion. The wild bull is the Anu. The lion is the Enlil of the desert. The wild bull is the lioness.
Mannu-ki-... ;
their big ox, their ...
He poured out his eyes ...
... his face
The best of health to my lord!
The land of the king is well; the fort is well; the king, my lord, can be glad.
... will be in your ...
Sargon (II),
... the son of Anu
Monument of Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of the deities Aššur, Anu, Sîn, Šamaš, Adad, (and) Bēl (Marduk), (and) the one who built the temple of the goddess Bēltīya (Zarpanītu), the exalted lady: (this monument is) the image of (the god) Aššur, his lord, which he set up in front of the image of the god Ašš
In the garden, at the beginning of the spring, when the water in the canal rises, at the appearance of the morning and evening, when the stars of heaven and earth shine, when the oracle query is posited before the gods, when the goddesses of heaven and earth are appealed to, when the goddesses of the netherworld are invoked, when the goddesses of the steppe are called by name, ...
Mannu-ki-Arbail the ... and the scribes ... who went (away) with ... have returned ...
Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, viceroy of Ur, son of Ningal-iddin, viceroy of Ur, built Ebabbar, the new temple.
I tore down that small palace in its entirety, from its foundations to its battlements.
... the king, my lord
Witness Kimamaya.
Witness Abdi-Dadî, chief of the levy.
A tablet of ... -Sin to the king, his lord: saying, "To the king, my lord:
The 'weapon'-mark of the 'increment' rises to the left.
Month Nisan (I), eponym year of Ereš-ilu.
... they have ordered
Now, let the king, my lord, send a royal order to Il-yada' that he should come to the review and that I, in my turn, may speak with the other (officials) and conclude the treaty with them.
Witness U...
20 ditto each, at 1 cubit's height, ditto, the backs (red), of the port;
Witness ... -Nabû.
Concerning the star ... about which the king, our lord, wrote to us, is it indeed not visible to them? They say it is dark, it is not seen. It is said as follows:
The gods Aššur (and) Adad will listen to the prayers of a later prince when that wall becomes dilapidated and he rebuilds (it). May (the same prince) restore my clay cone to its place.
... of Šumma-ilani, at the disposal of Ninuayu.
1 seah 1 'litre' of spiced bread; a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
... to the seed
... Enuma Anu Enlil
Palace of Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, descendant of Sennacherib, king of the world (and) king of Assyria, offspring of Sargon (II), king of the world (and) king of Assyria, chosen by the gods Aššur and Marduk, I erected my royal statue in Nineveh for the admiration of future kings.
... years
... the palace herald
Disregard what they speak with (their) mouths, or what they think...
... to Nabû'a
Ever since Mukin-zeri set up camp against me, I have been living under the king's aegis.
I put to the sword their magnates, including Nabû-šuma-iškun, son of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), who had taken away their gold-plated (chariot) mountings by force during a previous campaign and had sold (them) for money.
An estate of 1 hectare ... ;
... he got scared
... of the king I do not know. I do not ...
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
Bel and Nabû ...
I have seen the ... ; you ...
an estate of 3 decares adjoining Lubba-ana-ili;
May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May Aššur, Bel and Nabû give happiness and physical well-being to the king, my lord!
Witness Šarru-palu'a, royal bodyguard.
The fort and the Puqudu (troops) of the king, our lord, are well. The servants of the king, our lord, are strong and have recovered.
Shamash-kenu-usur,
Month of Adar (XII), thirtieth day, eponymy of Erišum, governor of the goddesses of the gods, my fathers, who is constantly attentive to the work of the goddess Ištar, my lady, and has no rival among the princes of the four quarters, ... for the well-being of the goddess Ištar, his lady, ... I constantly ... large horses which ... to the goddess ... , which do not ... to the goddess Ištar, his lady, ...
If the moon becomes visible in Nisan (I) on the 30th day:
... Urmanu(nu)
... concerning the killing of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, and Assurbanipal, the crown prince of the Succession Palace
Witness Suhuru.
The chief haruspex of the Akkadians, who is the governor of Calah, is in Arbela. They should bring him to Calah, and the king, my lord, should question him.
I have sent ...
He entered into it with all his troops, and (then) I defeated him.
As to those men, I have not yet heard whether they are dead or alive. If they are alive, I shall punish them.
Witness Zarutî, chariot driver of the crown prince.
... before me
Witness Sin-uballiṭ, ...
Fingernail of Zer-sama', owner of the field, garden, threshing floor and house being sold.
... will come out ...
If Scorpius comes close to the front of the moon and stands there: the king will exercise world dominion; the enemy will submit to him.
I built (and) completed that palace in its entirety. I brought the god Aššur, the great lord, and the gods who dwell in Assyria into it (and) made splendid offerings before them. I made that palace as bright as day. I settled in it permanently the people of the land of Sumer and Akkad who had come to serve me. I placed in it the best of everything, (and) made it more splendid than before. I had the gods Nabû and Marduk, the great gods who support me, enter into it and take up
not yet ...
... river
... before the city gate of ...
Total, in the domestic quarters, in Samanu,
Does your great divinity know it? Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Witness Ilumma-le'i, cohort commander.
... his ... I made enter Babylon and ... I made stand in ... I made the god Sîn, the lord of the crown, take up residence in Egišnugal, the abode of his lordly majesty. I made the gods Nabû, Marduk, Ninkura, and Tammuz, the gods who dwell inside it, ... I made ...
If the earth quakes all day: dispersal of the land.
The 'station' is present. The 'path' on the left ...
they go ...
... who ...
... Babylon ...
From Nabû-belu-ka''in.
The silver which the prefects of the village managers, who were appointed over the people of the country, was weighed out as 2 talents and 18 minas of silver by the (mina) of Carchemish. My messenger took 1/2 shekel of gold, 2 tunics, and 3 tunics from him and brought them to the king, my lord.
(As for) Ḫanūnu of the city Gaza, he became frightened by my mighty weapons and fled to Egypt. I conquered the city Gaza, his royal city, ... I carried off ... , gold, 800 talents of silver, people, together with their property. I carried off his wife, his sons, his daughters, ... , ... , the property of his (own) hands, (and) his gods.
x+20 hectares of field in the village of Abi-... ,
From Zakir.
Shalmaneser, strong king, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I) strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Šamšī-Adad (V) (who was) also king of the four quarters:
Witness NN.
or (whether) someone else will cause him to plot it, and he will listen and set out on disobedience, or (whether) someone else will cause the gods Aššur, Adad, Ber, (and) Bēl (Marduk) to set aside the oath of (the god) Aššur, (or) the oath of the god Adad, the oath of the god Ber, (or) the oath of the god Enlil of Assyria, or (whether) someone else will cause him to plot it, and he
... Aššur-ila'i
Witness Putaya.
I shall throw the logs into the river. I am waiting for rain.
If the moon becomes visible on the 30th day: frost; there will be rumor of an enemy.
Witness Nuranu. Danaya. Ditto ...
Afterwards, Nabû-eṭir, NN, and NN, (all) ... ,
x+16 talents, the sash;
Month Adar (XII), 10th day, eponym year of Mar-larim.
On the 18th day the king goes down to the House of God. The king ... The chanter steps forward before the king. He pours out a libation bowl of water of a star (= Mars) into the king's hands.
adjoining ...
... Babylon
or Mugallu ... ,
Witness Eriba-Adad.
Ditto by all the gods of Arbela!
By the command of the god Adad, my beloved, I marched to Mount Lebanon. I cut down cedar beams for the temple of the gods Anu and Adad, the great gods, my lords. I conquered the land Amurru, the entire mountain region of the land ... I received tribute from the land Elam, the land ...
6 oxen ...
... rains on it ...
... him
adjoining the field of Nabû-duru-uṣur,
Care of Kiṣir-Aššur, the exorcist of the House of Aššur.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. Good health to the king, my lord!
If there is an earthquake in Shebat (XI): attack of the enemy, loss of cattle; variant: fall of the enemy.
One mina of this (type) of oil-bread has not been weighed out."
To the king, my lord: your servant Babu-šumu-iddina of Calah. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
from Til-...
If a planet rises in Elul (VI): rising of business, thriving of grain.
At that time the temple of the god Enlil, the lord of the lands, my lord, which a king of the past had built and had constructed its walls, had become dilapidated and I completely rebuilt it from top to bottom. I restored its dilapidated parts with the work of the god Kulla and (thus) secured its brickwork. I raised its superstructure and (thereby) made its site bigger.
1, Gurinnu;
I had a large statue of the mother of the great gods, the goddess Erua, made for the people to see (her) splendor. I had the goddess Erua, the queen of the gods of heaven, rise up from her (text: “his”) dwelling, the place of prayer, and take up her (text: “his”) residence on (her) eternal dais.
I have written on tablets ... the ... of Akkad, the ... of Akkad, the ... of Assyria, (and) the tablets of ... , and am herewith sending (them) to you.
... to the name
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the troops and horses of the magnates of Bit-Kari of Sarda should go to the aid of the king of Damascus, to help him against the horses of ... ,
From Su...
his deputy,
If the earth quakes at night: worry for the land; the land will disappear.
As for me, the merciless one, the king who destroys (his) enemies, the one who overwhelms the wicked, the one who strikes down the insubmissive, by the command of the gods Anu and Enlil, the one who loves justice, (and) the one who hates injustice, I killed the wicked without number in battle.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... news of the land of Daddan
I brought out the auxiliary forces and his (Ummanaldašu’s) troops who had been brought in to strengthen the city Ursâ (and) I counted (them) as booty. I carried off large blocks of alabaster, beds, (iv 5') chairs, (and) stools, elephant ivory, ebony, boxwood, every kind of valuable treasure, together with his palace women, his daughters, courtiers, male singers, (and) female singers to Nineveh, my capital city, and I counted (them) as boot
... the magnates
They approached Nabû-zeru-ka''in, the mayor, the deputy governor of Nineveh.
Your servant Ana-Nabû-taklak: I would gladly die for the king of the universe, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: The land is well, and the servants of the king, my lord, are well. The watch of the king is very strong day and night.
Witness Ahunu.
I marched to the city Madaktu, his royal city. In a favorable month, on a propitious day, I took the direct road and marched straight away. The gods of heaven and netherworld granted me a good path and I marched safely to Nineveh.
Witness Nabû-ahu-uṣur, scribe.
Concerning the order that the king, my lord, gave me, it is very good. The king, my lord, has achieved his goal.
He performs this ritual twice in its entirety in the land.
If the 'well-being' is overturned and faces the gall bladder: the land will dwell in quiet.
Total 4 men, (assigned) to the fishers.
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-alik-pani. Good health to the king, my lord!
He has returned to Barhalza. In the hands of the messenger ...
If Adad thunders on the day of disappearance of the moon: ...
Month Tishri (VII), 22nd day, eponym year of Taklak-ana-šarri, governor of Nemed-Ištar.
There are servants who have taken away my fields and orchards. I have removed my people and they have been distributed among the people. They have been sold. The gods have not spared (anybody). Let me seize the (very) man who has sold them and let me appoint a guard with me so I can do justice.
a total of 5 persons, in lieu of the silver.
You shall not make common cause with any of Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, or with his brothers, sons by the same mother as him, or with his uncles, or with any of his relatives,
thus (speaks) your ... : "May they burn you, your women, your brothers, your sons and your daughters like a spring  lamb or kid."
Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
I myself took the road to the place where the ox had been slaughtered and sat down on (his) seat. I cut off my arm at the place where my arm had been pierced and had (it) filled with red mountain stone. I had (my servants) drink beer to (quench) my thirst.
11 1/2 shekels of silver for ...
May a strong weapon bring about the defeat of his enemies, may a merciless weapon afflict his enemies with pain, and may he make the kings bow down at the feet of Aššur-etel-ilāni.
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
... Išme-il
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial audience gift from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
Now then the ... official ...
... of ...
The leftovers of silver ...
11 shekels of silver of ...
The king's sons will be ill for a long time.
Total, 1 house.
1,
If the moon makes an eclipse in Tishri (VII) in the evening watch: the ruler will be furious with his people, and will seize (them) in prison.
1 cow of silver;
I conquered the Cimmerians in a pitched battle ... and returned safely to his land ...
x, (ditto) of the Sealand, sons of Yakin;
... I laid its foundation on top of its original foundation(s). I enlarged its structure to forty nindanu and (thus) made its plan bigger. I raised its superstructure 29 courses of brick high. I built (and) completed (it) from its foundations to its crenellations. I decorated (it) in a splendid fashion.
I stood with my bodyguard and merciless combat troops. I took the lead of them (and) ordered them to take the road to the land Immi(e)l. They sat on their (own) seats (and) marched on foot. They ascended the high mountains in order to evade me. They were constantly walking on rocky mountains. (vii 10) They were constantly thirsting for water. The heat of the sun was too much for them. They were constantly seeking out cool places to rest in.
You shall not turn against Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, nor make common cause with his enemy, nor make common cause with any other person or with any other country.
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
2 minas, of Nabû'a, goldsmith.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
his son of 3 spans,
Instead of their seals they impressed their fingernails.
(Owner of the ... ) being sold.
Ditto by Anu, the great gods, Šalimtu, Niphu, Kubu, Kubu, Ebeh, Adad, Šala, Taramuwa, Nisaba, Adad-Niphu, Ninurta-image, Fire-image, Light-image, Ningirsu, Hurmuš-image, Zababa-image, (and) Mandanu!
Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, attentive prince, who is the creation of the hands of the great gods, with the support of their exalted wisdom,
in Ab (V) ...
Dannaya, reporter.
Chief of accounts.
... Qibi-Bel ...
This is the ... of the judgment.
... Month Adar (XII), 22nd day, eponym year of ...
On the 27th of Tammuz (IV) ... , on the 28th ...
... he returned
Silim-Ashur has contracted and bought him for 30 shekels of silver.
... the king ...
In the hands of my messenger to the king, my lord.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
I am free from encumbrances and debts. I have a good repute with the king.
... x hundred sheep
As to the roof-beams concerning which the king wrote to me, 226 heavy-duty roof-beams of the king's palace, 212 for the  'water-house,' ... 110 for the ... , 9 roof-beams of the  palace of Ekallate —
... , ... lamentation priest,
Will he survive and escape? Will he be saved? Will Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, be troubled and angry?
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... Arrapha
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
NN has contracted and bought from Mušallim-...
On the 16th day they were working in Calah. They finished their work, but have not yet received the payment.
To the king, my lord: your servant Issar-nadin-apli, the foreman of the scribes of Arbela. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû, Marduk, and Ištar of Arbela bless the king, my lord!
9 towns ...
Witness Nabû-...
Aššur-da''in-šarri, NN,
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
Statue of the woman Naqīʾa ...
If it is acceptable to the king, my lord, let the king not be overly concerned.
8 beams: length x cubits, width one bone;
... threshing floor, 10+x hectares of land,
This from before Aššur.
On the first day of the month, in the middle of the well, I raised the well-head and filled it up to the brim. But it was not as full as before, and I had to lower the well-head.
The treaty which they made ... , when they heard from us that the king had said: "I will punish Nabû-šumu-iškun and Ṣillaya," they got afraid, saying: "The king's word to you: Why did you attack Urdu-Mullissi?"
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: good for Akkad, bad for Elam and the Westland.
Month Iyyar (II), ... th day, eponym year of NN, governor of ...
... his ...
... he burns a female kid
... who were defeated
Of ... : the priests of the House of God.
in my mouth ...
Witness Tešap...
x farmers; 1 herdsman; x+96, 94,
If there is an eclipse in Sivan (III) on the 14th day and it rises in the eclipse: three gods will be seen, and four will be seen together. If the eclipse begins in the south and its right side lies in the north: the king of Ur will be shut up in Ur, and the king of Ur will experience misfortune. If the eclipse begins in the north and its left side lies in the south: the king of Ur will be shut up in Ur, and his son will kill him; the son will sit on the throne of his father, and the
... they will cut off their ...
they should ... his mouth ...
... their threshing floors
At that time, the shrines of the mighty gods of the land Akkad, my lord, became dilapidated. I cleared away the debris of Eanna, the temple of the goddess Ištar, mistress of the lands, his lady. I rebuilt Eanna, the temple of the god Nannāru, which had become dilapidated. I made its structure larger than the one in the days of the past.
Witness Mannu-ki-ilu. Witness Husurayu.
Aya-idri, ... ;
Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan),
I decorated Emašmaš (and) Egašankalama with silver (and) gold, (and) filled (them) with splendor.
Afterwards, Teumman, (my) mortal enemy, sat on the throne of Urtaku in order to take away the land. Urtaku, the son of Teumman, the (very) image of a gallû-demon, (vii 10') (and) Uppa, the son of Ummanaldašu, the son of a king who came before Urtaku, (and) ninety members of the royal family, without number, (vii 15') took away the land Elam from Teumman. They grasped my royal feet
Witness Nargî.
Bel-dan,
4 sheep ... ;
x ... s, 1 seah of sesame oil;
He strews flour, ... , and pours wine and beer. The master of the banquet strews incense and says: “He who is present shall pay back the debts that he owes.”
(Property) of Qibi-Ubšû, the prince who resides in Sippar, Nippur, and Babylon.
In the city Ṭurušpâ, his (Ummanaldašu’s) city, I defeated him and took much plunder from him. At his city gate I set up my royal image.
Witness NN, ša šēpi guard.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of himself, two shekels of silver belonging to the booty of the land of Sikris.
Disregard that you have seen fear and terror at night...
Witness Aššur-aplu-iddina. Witness Ubru-na'id, oil-presser.
... ;
I had a bridge constructed opposite the Citadel Gate with paving stones of white limestone and I named it “The Palace of Joyful Exaltation.” I had a bridge constructed opposite the Gate of the Rising Sun with paving stones of silver and bronze and I named it “The Palace of the Joyful People.” I had a bridge constructed opposite the Gate of the Lions with paving stones of white limestone and I named it “The Palace of the Joyful People.”
The 26th day: joy of heart.
30 ditto, at the disposal of ... ,
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhe, conscript.
... s, seed corn in the irrigated field
I mustered my troops (and) ordered the march against the Cimmerians. I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the city Akkad. I brought out horses, archers, Elamites, Aramean, (and) Chaldean troops, together with Nergal-nāṣir (and) the citizens of the city Susa, and I counted (them) as booty.
Inspected  Missing
5 minas of silver by the (mina) of Carchemish, belonging to Nergal-šarru-uṣur, at the disposal of Nabû-šumu-iddina, son of Nabû-ra'im-ketti, the scribe of the governor of Dur-Šarruken.
“Is it pleasing to the great lady, Ištar?”
Mannu-zeri,
6 bags of (mixed) kernels.
Bel-shadua,
A cloudbank lies there.
Nabû-ušabši ...
Total: 3 seahs of bread, 1 seah 8 'litres' of beer.
To the king, my lord: your servant PN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Dari-abu'a or his sons, grandsons, brothers or nephews, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Tabni-Issar, his sons and grandsons, shall pay 2 minas of silver to redeem the woman.
Speak with Ardâ! On the 27th day, in the evening, he came to Sasî, the city overseer, saying: "The scribe ... ; Sasî, the scribe, and Nabû-eṭiranni ... ; the 28th day, Sasî with you; why did you summon me?"
Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, marched about victoriously in mighty mountains and difficult terrain. He had strong chairs of boxwood made and had (them) hauled up with great difficulty on (their) necks. He had (the chairs) dragged on rollers. He had (the chairs) dragged on (their) necks like a team of horses.
Total: the food master ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Kiṣir-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord!
Ninurta-ilaya.
... Calah
... the god of the city
... upon them
Egišlamšaršar: “House, make young men lie prostrate!”: the house of DN.
To the god Adad, canal inspector of heaven (and) underworld, lord of all, the exalted, the powerful, the splendid, the one who controls water (and) irrigation, the one who makes crops grow (and) plants flourish, the one who opens springs, the one who controls rivers, the one who opens up sources of water, the one who provides abundance, the one who makes grain and dates grow (and) prosper, the one who makes crops flourish, the one who provides abundance, the one who opens up springs, the one who controls rivers, the
Concerning what the king wrote to me: "Is there anyone who has seen it?" — I have indeed seen it, but I have not seen anyone else. I am herewith sending it to the king, my lord.
... creator of ...
And this is the result of his (= Šarru-lu-dari's) deeds. He has made the ... go out of my house and has made me live in a house which is not mine. He should go to the palace of the king, my lord.
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Palace of Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, son of Sennacherib, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, king who (re)confirmed the privileged status of the gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Nabû, Marduk, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela — the great gods, his l
1 woman, old, ... ;
... have been strengthened
I have brought 90 men from the town Isitu into the town Ezirtu and settled them there. I have brought 30 men from the town ... into ...
with ...
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 21st day, eponym year of Dadî, treasurer.
Now then the messenger who gave him the message said: "Go and give Nikkal-iddin back to Esarhaddon on the throne, and he will see (that) and will be reconciled with you."
... the goddess Tašmētu, the god ... , the great queen, ... , the one who makes him (the god Marduk) rise, ... , the one who makes Esagil and Babylon shine, ... , the one who makes firm the foundation(s) and establishes secure footing (lit. “seats”) in (the midst of) the underworld, ... , who does not relent, ... , who does not cease praying, ... , who does not cease beseeching (the gods), ... , who does not cease beseeching (the
The king performs sheep offerings. One ox, six sheep for Aššur; one sheep, one stone (for) Šerua; one sheep, one stone (for) Tania; the ... s of Nabû, the ... s of the šakku-house, two stones (for) the Lady-of-the-House, two stones (for) the Lady-of-the-Dais, four stones (for) the ... , four stones (for) the ... s of the dais, one stone (for) Ištar.
The temples of the king, my lord, are well; I am keeping the watch of the king, my lord.
at the disposal of Ubru-Nabû, ...
Bar-dî has contracted and bought it from Bel-šarru-uṣur for 5 1/2 minas of silver by the mina of the king.
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
Witness Bel-ṣalli.
Surâ, shepherd; 1 son; 1 woman; 168 sheep in the village of Suriba.
The king, my lord, will achieve his goal.
2 ...
... the xth day;
The ... servant of Nabû-šallim-ahhe said to me as follows: "When the king returns from Nineveh to Calah, the eunuchs will be assembled on the barley, and the cupbearer will receive barley from the cupbearer's house. He will divide it in two days, and gold will be given to the goldsmiths."
As to what my lord wrote to me: "... ; if ... , ... bricks, ... ," — I have done accordingly. If I hear that the king is coming to Der, I shall bring the city towers there and place the water in them.
If Adad shouts on a day without clouds: there will be darkness in the land.
With Bel and Nabû, who give you power, you have subdued your servants who are in your hands, and they have done work for the king, my lord, for three years. The king, my lord, will say: "They have been working for me in the previous years."
Palace of Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria.
Concerning the ... about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me,
(Property) of the palace of ... of Nineveh.
... I made (them) an object of wonder. I had a bridge constructed opposite the Citadel Gate with paving stones of white limestone (and) ... I named it “The Gate of the Rising Sun.”
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
as ...
I took the city Elenzaš as a royal city and a fortress for that district, and (then) I changed its former name and
The brewers take 9 seahs of barley for beer, including that for the  huzirina-rites before the Image.
future prince who ...
I have made it clear to Chaldea, I have cut down the cedar beams and cypress beams, and I have piled up the cedar beams and cypress beams on the temple. I have cut down the doors of cypress.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
x, scholar;
Iyyar (II), Sivan (III), (and) Pabilsag are five months. On the 14th day one god is not seen with the other: the king should know (this).
Witness Mutakkil-Marduk, scribe.
... he turned his attention
Now the gods of the king, my lord, have taken action concerning the Karallaeans. These (omens) pertain to
to ...
The ... which is in ...
x minas of silver belonging to Lu-ki-ili, at the disposal of Dannî.
Witness Šulmu-beli. Witness Su'a, from Calah.
And he will die of hunger.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether, (should) Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, appoint the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the position which is written in this papyrus,
If the earth quakes continually: business will diminish; the cattle of the land will perish; the dates will not ripen; the land will become poor.
... the fort
Whoever takes this inscription away from its place and ... , may the gods who ...
We went to the Palace ... and ... ed the ... of the rear ... in ...
... Hurdanu to the palace ...
If the sun stands in the halo of the moon: there will be truth in the land; the son will speak the truth with his father; universal peace.
NN, Tattî, and his people
By the gods of the king: I have not written anything false from Bit-... !
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty, or (that) the extispicy has become jumbled in my mouth...
Witness Itti-Adad-ahhutu, servant of the vizier.
... I wrote him
shall give 10 minas of silver (and) one mina of gold, and shall return the money tenfold to its owner. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
He died of a broken heart. His whole body was in tears.
... Witness Inurta-šarru-uṣur.
... to the guard
If the moon comes out darkly and is seen early: rain.
Witness Nabû-šezib.
... fish ...
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
7 bedspreads, 19 blankets, a bed;
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, ditto.
... the vizier to the river
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The barber ...
... opened our ears to listen to him
... have been stationed on ...
x reinforced lower garments ... ;
(of the) town of the royal well; the town of Kar-Harran;
... Nabû in Babylon, and ... in the canebreak
Should Assurbanipal, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, appoint the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the priesthood of the temple of Marduk?
The lackeys bring the iron utensils and the iron tongs and put them in your hands. You throw dust on them and put them on your head. You throw dust on them again and put them on your head. You throw dust on them again and again put them on your head. You throw dust on them again and again put them on your head. You throw dust on them again and again put them on your head.
Zeru-ukin, Nergal-šarru-uṣur, Hannî;
The people of all the lands bless you, O king, my lord. You are the one who protects the temple of the kings. All the people who are in your presence and who guard your treaty swear by your gods that you will not change. Just as in distant days, when you were small, your father ... , and your gates ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šarru-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
... they refused to
... on account of it he went to the city ... Lulla-Bel ... Muqin-Aššur and NN ...
Let him do and finish it, and then he may come into the presence of the king, my lord, and give the king, my lord, a (full) report.
They did not give ...
will bring horses ... , and
he has gone ...
These five months I have been waiting for the news of the king, my lord, and now Bel and Nabû have encouraged me. They have taken the road to Calah.
... in the underworld without ... , the great kings ...
... 4 ...
a ditto of quinces;
... I exempted them from tax and ...
... to one
3 sons of Nabû-zeru-lešir;
Mars became visible in the path of the Enlil stars on the 26th day. I saw it and wrote to the king, my lord, on the 27th day.
... has been strengthened
9 (cuts of) meat, the New Palace;
So that the construction of my palace might be carried out correctly and that my handiwork be completed, at that time, the god Aššur and the goddess Ištar, who love my priesthood, revealed to me a source of trunks of cedar, which since distant days grew thick as they stood in the Sirāra mountain range.
The 'station' is present. The 'paths' are 2, the lower one is white and speckled. The 'well-being' is present...
Iranzu of the land Mannea heard about the might of (the god) Aššur, my lord, that I had accomplished in the mountains, and his heart pounded. He came to Dur-Kutti-Ashur, which is at the foot of Mount ... , before me, and kissed my feet. (i 5) He brought with him ... horses, mules, oxen, and sheep and goats, ...
1/2 mina of silver by the (mina) of the king belonging to Šamaš-daruru, at the disposal of Mannu-aki-Ninua.
... first extispicy...
... my ...
From my house, I have brought out the ... s of my property. From my  property, I have brought out my ... s, my footstool and my sandals.  I have not tread upon the ground.
... who ...
Bar-sipitu wrote to me through the hands of the delegate: "Why did you kill ... ?"
May Kullab, the 'station' and 'path' be cursed in the land of the Hittites.
... the city of the treasurer
40 ditto, ... ;
The man Lu-ahu’a, a Bit-Hambanite, came to me on account of Bel-emuranni, saying: “Come, let me mobilize all the men who went to Bit-Hamban and ... all those who came to Eṭiru, and let me go with you.” I said to him: “We are not going to mobilize Bit-Hamban. Let us mobilize you and go.”
... ;
4 homers of wheat belonging to Bahianu, at the disposal of La-amašši-Bel.
adjoining the house of Luqu (... ),
I set up in it (the palace) a stele bearing my name, the name of my city, the name of my city lord, (and) the name of my governor, and I deposited (it) therein.
x shekels, single (weight), Aššur-ayu-taqqin;
Indabibi, who sat on the throne of the land Elam after Tammarītu, saw the might of my weapons that had previously prevailed over the land Elam and (as for) the Assyrians whom I had sent to aid Nabû-bēl-šumāti, son of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), he became frightened. He brought Nabû-bēl-šumāti, son of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-bal
12 minas of silver, capital, belonging to Šamaš-abu'a, horse trainer,
If a cloudbank lies between Jupiter and Orion:
The gods who go to the house of Dagan:
Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, strong king,
To the king, my lord: your servant Nashir-Bel. Good health to the king, my lord!
... Kalbi-Ukû
Nabû-per'u-lešir;
6 blankets, a bed ...
I inscribed monumental inscriptions (and) clay inscriptions bearing my name for future days. By the command of the god Aššur, the great lord, my lord, I dedicated (them) for the preservation of my life, the overthrow of my enemy, the protection of the weapons of the god Aššur, my lord, and the overthrow of my foes. I set (them) up for all time in the midst of the sea and the mountains.
... of the palace manager of the crown prince;
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of Assyria, unrivalled king, pious shepherd who reveres the great gods, guardian of truth who loves justice, renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the insubmissive, (and) the one who strikes enemies with lightning:
I uprooted all of the Aḫlamû (Arameans), Sutians, (and) Ḫabḫian (tribes) of the city Ḫirimmu and I counted (them) as booty. I defeated the Yasubigallians, a dangerous enemy, and I destroyed the land Ellipi.
1 (polyptych of) 2 (leaves), 3 (leaves), ... , from the Ishur māda series,
Shamshi-ilu,
Should the subject of this query stay in his position, and (should) your great divinity know it?
I built a house for the god Apsû, which is in the palace of my lordly majesty, which is in the area of the ziggurrat, from top to bottom. I built a house for the god Aššur-nādin-aḫḫē, king of Assyria, and I named it “The House of the Ziggurrat of Erība-Adad.” I built a house for the god Aššur-nādin-aḫḫē, king of Assyria, and I named it “The House of the Zigg
I shall inspect the fortresses in my presence and give orders where necessary.
Amat-šumu-iškun
If in Nisan (I) the sun rises and its light is dim: the land will live in quiet.
(               )                Bit-šarri               )
... may the goddess Gula, who loves him, destroy his ...
Concerning what you wrote to me through the hands of your emissaries:
... Iqisu
to ...
The king has heard ...
To the 'farmer,' our lord: your servants Adad-šumu-uṣur and Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health to our lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless our lord!
... ;
From Ašaredu.
Witness Balasî.
The king, my lord, told me: "You may return, but 40,000 barley rations must be here."
(As for) ... , the one who had cast off the yoke of his silver, they (the gods) leveled his city (and) ... as with a flood.
... I have been sent
By future sons, grandsons, (great) grand-sons, (great) grand-sons, distant descendants of Aššur, may this temple endure!
... the Gambulians ...
Witness Adad-aplu-iddina.
... they should not pull out
... "...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
I had a wall built around it (the city) and I named it Kār-Ḫaldīnu. I had forty-five towers built and I named them after the mountains. I built (and) completed (it) from top to bottom with large limestone (blocks and) I deposited my monumental inscriptions.
... Il-yada' ...
... should question Lu-šakin the king.
At the core of the sun there is a hole. Adad thunders at the core of the sun.
... their ... have come ...
At that time, the lands of the Hittite (king) became small. In my accession year (... )
in all x persons, servants of these gentlemen —
saying: "... s to the king
he took ...
Sphinxes of alabaster, as well as sphinxes of cast urudû-copper that were overlaid with zaḫalû-silver, and sphinxes of cast ... -metal, (together with) magnificent slabs of breccia, alabaster, elephant ivory, ebony, boxwood, musukkannu-wood, cedar, cypress, daprānu-juniper, juniper, and elammaku-wood, (together with) slabs of limestone, as much as was
... upon it ...
... with my stele ...
in Arbela, all ...
... The coils of the colon are 16 in number...
As to what you wrote to me: "The king of Urarṭu and his troops are coming; where are you?" —
This month, Sivan (III), which the whole land of Akkad has celebrated, is the festival of the gods. They have gone and settled in their eternal dwelling(s). By the command of the gods Marduk, Nanāya, (and) Uṣur-amāssu, the gods of Babylon, they have made all the lands bow down at my feet.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-bani-ahhe. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû (and) Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I exercised authority over the kings of the land Ḫatti (Syria) and the Upper Sea. I exercised authority over Baʾalu, king of the city Tyre, Menasu, king of the city Yadi, Qašme-rēši, king of the city Udmu, Muṣurī, king of the city Maʾum, Ṣil-Bēl, king of the city Ḫazītu, Mitinti, king of the city Ashkelon, Milki-ašapša, king of the city By
To the king, our lord: your servants Nabû-ra'im-nišešu (and) Salamanu. Good health to the king, our lord! May Nabû (and) Marduk bless the king, our lord!
