I roofed it with magnificent beams of cedar (and) cypress, whose scent is sweet, product(s) of Mount Amanus and Mount Sirāra, the holy mountains. I fastened bands of silver (and) copper on doors of white cedar (and) cypress and I installed (them) in its gates.
In the month of Aššur-rabi, the day was cloudy, the night was cloudy, the morning was cloudy, the evening was cloudy. The day was cloudy, the night was cloudy, the morning was cloudy, the evening was cloudy.
10 hectares of arable land, 10 hectares under cultivation therein ...
5 minas of red wool, 1 mina of madder, 1 mina of madder, 1 mina of madder, 1 mina of madder, 1 mina of madder, 1 mina of madder, 1 mina of madder, 1 mina of madder, 1 mina of madder, 1 mina of madder, 1 mina of madder, 1 mina of madder, 1 mina of madder, 1 mina of madder, 1 mina of madder,
... the land ...
what ...
... he will do
... Now then ...
total, 10 hectares ...
From this day, the 10th day of this month, the 10th day of this month, the 10th day of this month, the term stipulated for the performance of (this) extispicy —
Witness Barruqu, chariot driver.
Whoever alters the wording of this tablet, or sins against the treaty of the great gods, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Nabû-šarru-uṣur, chief eunuch, and his sons,
2 ...
Witness Urda-Nabû, scribe.
... I have given ...
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord!
... 1 1/2 minas ...
1 grove of poplars; 10 hectares of arable land.
May Nergal, Laṣ, Išum, Šalimtu, Šunipuru, Šalimtu, Šalimtu, Šalimtu, Šalimtu, Šalimtu, Šalimtu, Šalimtu, Šalimtu, Šalimtu, Šalimtu, Šalimtu, Šalimtu, Šalimtu, Šalimtu, Šalimtu, Šalimtu, Šalimtu, Šalimtu, Šalimtu, Šalimtu, Šalimtu, Š
4 hectares of arable land in the hands of Aššur-ila'i.
40 hectares of arable land in the village of Ṣalmu-šarri-iqbi, in the charge of the commander-in-chief.
Month Iyyar (II), 1st day, eponym year of Nabû-ila'i, governor of Damascus.
... -šumu-...
Ahu-lâmašši ...
... he has given to me ...
... -naṣir, ... , 1 woman, 1 daughter, ... ,
I had a stele bearing my name made and I engraved image(s) of the deities Aššur, Bēl (Marduk), (and) Nabû, my lords, on it and I placed (it) in the city Kalḫu, my capital city.
Ditto by Nabû, Tašmetu, Kutatati!
... of the land of Akkad, which ... in the land of Akkad ...
I had a stele bearing my name made and I engraved image(s) of the deities Aššur, Bēl (Marduk), (and) Nabû, the great gods, my lords, on it and I placed (it) in the temple of the god Aššur, my lord. I made (it) shine like daylight and made (it) resplendent. I made (it) shine like daylight and made (it) resplendent. I made (it) shine like daylight and made (it) resplendent.
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract, whether Sin-... , his sons, his grandsons, his brothers, his nephews, ...
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhešu, scribe.
... the goddess Nanāya, the goddess of the city Kalḫu, the goddess of the city Arbela, the goddess of the city Kār-Tukultī-Ninurta, the goddess of the city Adad-nārārī, the goddess of the city Aššur-dān (I), the goddess of the city Aššur-uballiṭ (I), the goddess of the city Aššur-nādin-šumi (I), the goddess of the city A
... the sunrise
If Mars stands in Scorpius: the king of the land will be shut up in his palace.
... Yasubâ
... he has given to me
10 hectares of arable land in the district of Assyria, in the province of Harran.
Witness Sakkannu, porter.
... Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, ... who ... the city of Baltil (Aššur), ... the city of Aššur, ... the city of Aššur, ... the city of Aššur, ... the city of Aššur, ... the city of Aššur, ... the city of Aššur, ... the city of Aššur, ... the city of Aššur, ... the city of Ašš
Venus ...
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the king, my lord. I have no one in my hands. I have no one in my hands. I have no one in my hands. I have no one in my hands. I have no one in my hands.
horses ...
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the king, my lord. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one.
1 1/2 minas of silver, capital, belonging to ... , at the disposal of Remanni-... , at the disposal of Remanni-Issar, at the disposal of Remanni-Issar, at the disposal of Remanni-Issar, at the disposal of Remanni-Issar, at the disposal of Remanni-Issar, at the disposal of Remanni-Issar, at the disposal of Remanni-Issar, at the disposal of Remanni-Issar, at the disposal of Remanni-Issar, at the
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Witness Mannu-ki-ili.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the 10th day of this month Iyyar (II), of this year, the term stipulated for the performance of (this) extispicy,
The money is paid completely.
All the temples of the gods Aššur, Bēl (Marduk), (and) Nabû, which Aššur-dān (I), king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rabi (I), king of Assyria, son of Aššur-uballiṭ (I), (who was) also king of Assyria, son of Erība-Marduk (I), (who was) also king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dūr-paniya (I),
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the 10th day of this month Iyyar (II), of this year, the term stipulated for the performance of (this) extispicy,
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, ... , should send Nabû-šarru-uṣur, chief eunuch, to the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, and whether he should go,
If Venus stands in the halo of the moon: the harvest of the land will prosper.
Bel-ahhe-iddina, ... of the king, my lord.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Sin-šarru-uṣur or his sons or grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Sin-šarru-uṣur, his sons and grandsons,
A tablet of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, to Aššur-remanni, king of Elam, my brother. Good health to my brother!
Month Tebet (X), 25th day, eponym year of Dadî.
... the land of ...
... and ...
I have now written to ...
Ditto by Palil, the great lord!
... he ...
total 4 ditto, 1 ditto,
Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the
... and the land of Akkad
Now then I am writing to you: ...
1 sisalhu ox, 1 male sheep, ...
total, in the charge of Nabû-šarru-uṣur.
... of NN
If Mars stands in Scorpius: there will be an eclipse.
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract, whether Aššur-ila'i or his sons or grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Sin-šarru-uṣur, his sons and grandsons,
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, who reveres him, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods,
I have now written to the Palace. Let my lord do as he finds appropriate. I have now written to the Palace, my lord, ...
... the 'finger' is thick ...
... my ...
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
As to what my lord wrote to me: "...
Witness Nabû-...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Remanni-ilu or his sons or grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Remanni-ilu, his sons or grandsons,
all the lands ...
If a star stands in the sky: the king of the land will widen his understanding.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šarru-uṣur. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I have heard that the palace of the land of Akkad ...
... the king, my lord ...
If on the 14th day the moon and sun are seen together: reliable speech, the land will become happy; the gods will remember Akkad favorably; joy among the troops.
Witness Se'-immi.
The chief victualler of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, has contracted and bought from these men for one mina of silver.
Now, as to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why do you say: 'The gods of the king, my lord, are not in the presence of the king, my lord, and they are not in the presence of the king, my lord, and the gods of the king, my lord, are in the presence of the king, my lord, and the gods of the king, my lord, are in the presence of the king, my lord, and the gods of the king, my lord, are in the presence of the king, my lord, and the gods of the king, my
the work ...
Witness Mar-idri, ...
Aššur-mušallim-Aššur ...
When you are to verse wine and beer in front of the censer, you say: “Aššur, bless Mullissu! Mullissu, bless Mullissu!”
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why do you ...
In the month of Tebet (X), 1st day.
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, who reveres the god Aššur and the goddess Mullissu, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, who reveres the lord of lords, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, who reveres the lord of lords, who reveres the king of the gods, who reveres the king of the gods, who reveres the king of the gods, who rever
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Aššur-da''inanni.
1 woman,
and ...
they have ...
... he is not ...
... the scribe ...
Now, if the king, my lord, commands, ...
I have now written to my lord, and I have now written to my lord again. I have now written to my lord again, and I have now written to my lord again. I have now written to my lord again.
... Aššur-mušezib
... the governor of Raṣappa, the governor of ... , the governor of ... , the governor of ... , the governor of ... , the governor of ... , the governor of ... , the governor of ... , the governor of ... , the governor of ... , the governor of ... , the governor of ... , the governor of ... , the governor of ... , the governor of ... , the governor of ... , the governor of ... , the governor of ... , the governor of ... , the governor of ... , the governor of ... , the governor of ... , the governor of ... , the governor of ... , the governor of ... ,
The king of Elam heard about the conquest of his land and fear fell upon him. He abandoned the city Madaktu, his royal city, and set out for the land Ḫaydala, which is in the mountains.
... in my palace
Month Ab (V), 17th day, eponym year of Bēlšunu, governor of the city Ḫindānu (648).
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, should send the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the man whose name is written in this papyrus,
Witness Nabû-eriba, keeper of the tablet.
To the goddesses ...
If Mars stands in Scorpius: ...
... the bodyguard ...
I carried off the people of the land Bīt-Yakīn, their gods, their property, their possessions, their goods, their property without number, (and) their goods without number. I brought them to Assyria. I placed them under the authority a eunuch of mine, the governor of the city Ḫatarikka.
of the people of ...
The chief cupbearer of the House of God has contracted and bought from these men for ...
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the king, my lord. I have now written to the king, my lord, about what I heard. I have now written to the king, my lord, what I heard.
... he has given to me
In the middle of the 'finger' there is a hole. The upper part is elevated. The breast-bone is thick...
I had heard that the king of Elam had died, and I became afraid of the king, my lord. I wrote to the king, my lord, and I have now heard that the king, my lord, is well. I am now writing to the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, be glad.
Witness Arbailayu.
The king, my lord, knows that I have no horses.
1 woman,
The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 10 in number. The breast-bone is thick...
As to what my lord wrote to me: "... the people of ...
Now then I am writing to my lord:
... the god Enlil, lord of lords.
I had the people of the lands that I had conquered carry baskets (of earth) and they made bricks in brickmolds of ivory, boxwood, ebony, musukkannu-wood, cedar, cypress, (and) every kind of aromatic. I had them made into bull colossi and sphinxes and I made their appearance(s) resplendent. I made their appearance(s) resplendent (and) made (them) shine like daylight.
Witness Man...
I have now written to Assyria, my lord, in the hands of Aššur-zeru-ibni. May Aššur, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šarru-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
On my ninth campaign, I mustered my troops (and) took the direct road against Uaiteʾ (Iautaʾ), the king of the land of the Arabs who had sinned against my treaty (and) had cast off the yoke of my lordship. I had mercy on him and (then) I gave him the kingship of the land of the Arabs, the land of the Qutu, (and) the land of the Yasubigallians, (and) I placed (them) on his (Uaiteʾ’s) throne. I imposed
The Lady of Babylon, who ...
The chief victualler of the palace of Assyria ...
I have heard that the king of Elam is in Babylon.
The king of the land Elam heard about the conquest of his land and fear fell upon him. He abandoned the city Madaktu, his royal city, and set out for the city Ḫaydala, which is in the mountains. He crossed the Idide River, which is in the mountains, and established that river as his defensive position. He made the people of the land Elam, as many as there were, take up hoe and basket and they made bricks. He made bricks in brickmolds of ivory, boxwood, ebony, (and) musukkann
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let the king, my lord, send word and have them brought here!" —
The scribe of the chief cupbearer has contracted and bought it for 10 minas of silver.
The king, my lord, knows that ...
Seal of ...
I had a stele bearing my name made and I engraved image(s) of the great gods, my lords, on it and I placed before them an image bearing my name. I made an image bearing my name and I placed it before them.
1 ditto of sesame; 1 ditto of kernels.
... the temple of the goddess Ištar ...
the sons of ...
8 hectares, ditto, of sesame;
The king of the lands, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the king, my lord. I have now written to the king, my lord, about what I have seen.
... minas of silver
... to the city of Harran
Witness ...
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, (and) king of the land of Sumer and Akkad —
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did you not write to me?" I have now written to the king, my lord.
... this
In the evening of the 14th day, when the king, my lord, was in the presence of the king, my lord, I was staying overnight in the presence of the king, my lord.
If the moon at its appearance stands in a stable position: waiting for rain and flood will be made.
On my return march, I placed Aššur-nādin-šumi, my first-born son (whom) the god Aššur called to exercise kingship, on his lordly throne and entrusted him with the wide land of Sumer and Akkad. I made him sit on his royal throne and entrusted him with the wide land of Sumer and Akkad. I made him sit on his royal throne and entrusted him with the wide land of Sumer and Akkad.
In the eponymy of Aššur-šarru-uṣur, governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari,
... he
Good health to the king, my lord!
The city Kalḫu, which is on the border of Assyria, ... , which Aššur-rabi, king of Assyria, conquered and which is in the district of the city Aššur,
... he has given to me
Witness Qurdiya.
12 (items): copper basins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbas
As to the news of the son of Yakin, he is in Babylon. He is saying: "The king of Elam is in Babylon. He is saying: 'The king of Elam is in Babylon. The king of Elam is in Babylon.' He is saying: 'The king of Elam is in Babylon.' He is saying: 'The king of Elam is in Babylon.' He is saying: 'The king of Elam is in Babylon.' He is saying: 'The king of Elam is in Babylon.' He is saying: 'The king of Elam
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, the one who built Egalzagdinutukua (“The Palace Without a Rival”), the one who constructed the temple of the god Aššur, the one who built Esagil and Ezida, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, the one who built Eanna (“The House Whose Brill
Witness Marduk Remanni-ilu, cohort commander.
1 ditto ditto, knotted ... ;
2 tureens of bouillon;
adjoining the field of the village of Harran,
If Adad thunders ...
3 ditto of sesame; 1 ditto of kudimmu salt.
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Marduk-šarru-uṣur.
1 woman, ... , 1 daughter, 1 woman, 1 daughter, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1
Ashur-zeru-ibni.
The rest of the words of the treaty are (written) upon the breast of the eclipse.
In the morning, in the evening, and at night, he shall not eat bread.
... this ...
The 'finger' is thick. The middle of the 'finger' is split...
I have now written to you: ...
10 ...
What are the king my lord's instructions?
Nabû-zeru-iddina ...
... this ...
I have written to the king, my lord.
The king, my lord, knows that I have no scribe. I have now written to the king, my lord.
(As for) the one who alters my inscribed object (and) disrespects my words, may Aššur, king of the gods, overthrow his kingship, curse him angrily, and make his name (and) his seed disappear from the land.
Witness Našuh-šarru-uṣur.
Witness Šep-...
Witness ... Witness Aya-ilu.
adjoining the road that leads from the wadi of Harran to the wadi of Harran,
... in the month of Iyyar (II),
1 woman, 1 daughter, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman,
If Adad thunders in Shebat (XI): the land will eat plenty.
in ...
Witness ... -ilu, ...
A tablet of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, king of the world (and) king of Assyria, to the governor of Arrapha, his lord.
I have now written to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why do you ... the horses of the king, my lord, in the district of Harran?" — ...
This is the word of ...
... he has ... ed ...
In the month of ... , ... th day, eponym year of ...
... he ...
I conquered the land of the Qutu, the land of the Uqumanu, the lands of the Qutu, the lands of the Uqumanu, the lands of the Qutu, the lands of the Uqumanu, the lands of the Qutu, the lands of the Uqumanu, the lands of the Qutu, the lands of the Uqumanu, the lands of the Qutu, the lands of the Uqumanu, the lands of the Qutu, the lands of the Uqumanu, the lands of the Qut
Nabonidus, king of Babylon, the one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, the one who renovates Esagil and Ezida, the one who provides for Ezida, the one who provides for Ezida, the one who provides for Ezida, the one who provides for Ezida, the one who provides for Ezida, the one who provides for Ezida, the one who provides for Ezida, the one who provides for Ezida, the one who provides for Ezida, the one who provides for Ezida, the one who provides for Ezida, the one who provides for
... of ...
1 woman ...
... , Bel-Harran-šadû'a, chief eunuch, ... , the one who reveres the king, ... , the one who ... the king, ...
Witness Ilu-ila'i, brewer.
I have now written to the king, my lord, about the news of the Elamites. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
The king, my lord, knows that I have no field, no threshing floor, no orchard, no people.
The priest of the temple of Aššur has said: "The king of Elam is a criminal.
... I
... you ...
In the month of Sivan (III), the 1st day, when the king, my lord, wrote to me,
Marduk-šallimanni,
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract, whether Sin-šarru-uṣur or his sons or grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Mannu-ki-ahhešu,
... Ubrî
The 11th day.
and his people, ...
I have now written to the king, my lord, ...
In the month of Iyyar (II), on the 10th day.
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, (and) king of the land of Sumer and Akkad —
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
In my seventh year, Aššur-... , my lord, wrote to me: "You ...
To the king, my lord: your servant ...
Witness ... a, son of Bel-duri.
— Mars stands in Scorpius; this is its interpretation:
A cup of small onions; a cup of quinces;
An estate of 1 hectare of land in the steppe of Harran, adjoining the field of ...
I had a stele bearing my name and my royal image made and I engraved (it) with the work of the god Kulla and placed (it) in the city Kalḫu, which is on the border of the land Elam. I left (it) for the future...
... in Assyria ...
... their ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šarru-uṣur. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
1 woman, 1 male, 1 female, 1 male, 1 female,
A thigh, a shoulder, outer cuts, a cup of fig-beer;
On my return march, I placed Aššur-nādin-šumi, my first-born son on his lordly throne and entrusted him with the wide land of Sumer and Akkad.
... the king, my lord, should know (this).
1 mina of copper, capital, belonging to Remanni-ilu, at the disposal of Remanni-ilu, at the disposal of Remanni-ilu, at the disposal of Remanni-ilu, at the disposal of Remanni-ilu, at the disposal of Remanni-ilu, at the disposal of Remanni-ilu, at the disposal of Remanni-ilu, at the disposal of Remanni-ilu, at the disposal of Remanni-ilu, at the disposal of Remanni-ilu, at
to ...
(As for) Šamšī-ilu, the field marshal of the land Elam, he heard about the conquest of his land and fear fell upon him. He abandoned the city Madaktu, his royal city, and set out for the presence of the king, my lord.
Witness Sa'eru.
... Now then
The king, my lord, should know (this).
A 2-seah jar of hinhinu-seeds;
... ditto, red, of the port, ...
... he
... I have sent ...
all the people ...
... to Assyria
1 ditto — Mullissu,
... the king ...
who ...
Palace of Shalmaneser, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dān (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria
... the king, my lord,
... 1, the town of Bit-Hamban,
to Elam ...
... the land of the Yoke ...
... ditto ditto, ditto, knotted, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto
If the star of Anu stands in the sky: the king of the land will widen his understanding; the king of the land will be shut up in his mind; the king of the land will be shut up in his mind; the king of the land will be shut up in his mind; the king of the land will be shut up in his mind; the king of the land will be shut up in his mind; the king of the land will be shut up in his mind.
I have ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Naṣiru. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Ištar bless the king, my lord!
The king, my lord, ...
— On the 14th day one god is seen with the other.
... the men of the confectioners
I am now writing to the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
I ...
To the king, my lord: your servant, Urdu-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord. May Aššur and Ištar bless the king, my lord.
4 hectares of arable land, 1 hectare under cultivation therein.
In the eponymy of Aššur-iddin, governor of the city Kalḫu (647).
May Bel and Nabû, the great gods, bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
The king, my lord, knows that I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one.
Total, 120 hectares of arable land, 10 hectares under cultivation therein.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
... to Elam ...
2 ditto, 2 seahs — 1 ditto, 2 seahs —
If ...
Now, I have written to the Palace about the horses which I have given to the prefects.
... &  beer  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &  &
... I
Seal of ... , owner of the ... being sold.
Nabonidus, king of Babylon, who provides for Esagil and Ezida.
who ...
Witness ... -ilu.
An estate of Sennacherib, king of Assyria, to the governor of Raṣappa, my lord. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
... to the king, my lord ...
In the month of Iyyar (II), the 3rd day, when the king of the lands, my lord, sent me to the city of Harran,
Witness Nabû-šallimanni, ditto ditto ditto.
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhešu.
I roofed it with magnificent beams of cedar (and) cypress, whose scent is sweet, product(s) of Mount Amanus and Mount Sirāra, the holy mountains. I fastened bands of silver (and) copper on doors of white cedar (and) cypress and I installed (them) in its gates.
in ...
... I have heard that
I have now written to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
The 10th day, when the moon was seen.
Aššur-Aššur, Aššur-Aššur, Aššur-Aššur, Aššur-Aššur, Aššur-Aššur, Aššur-Aššur, Aššur-Aššur, Aššur-Aššur, Aššur-Aššur, Aššur-Aššur, Aššur-Aššur, Aššur-Aššur, Aššur-Ašš
In the future, may one of the kings, my descendants, whom (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar, the great gods, nominate for ruling over the land and people, and may they select (them) and nominate (them) for ruling over the land and people. May they select (them) and nominate (them) for ruling over the land and people. May they select (them) and nominate (them) for ruling over the land and people. May they select (them) and nominate (them) for ruling
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
shall place 10 minas of silver (and) one mina of gold in the lap of Ištar of Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
... I have now written to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
the priest ...
... to Bit-Hamban ...
Aššur-ila'i, gardener; 1 woman: a total of 1. 1 garden in the town of Ṣi'immê.
... day ...
2 'litres' spiced bread; 2 'litres' spiced bread.
... the king, my lord, knows
If the moon reaches the sun and follows it closely: there will be truth in the land, and the son will speak the truth with his father. — On the 14th day one god is seen with the other.
I have now written to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
of the 24th day, in the charge of Ilu-ibni.
On my third campaign, I marched against Baʾal, the city ruler of the land Tyre who resides in the middle of the sea. Because he did not honor my treaty, I set up outposts against him and imposed upon him the payment of tribute (and) gifts (in recognition) of my overlordship so that he (now) pulls my yoke.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
An estate of ... hectares of arable land ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... ,
As the king, my lord, wrote to me ...
1 duck, 10 turtledoves. A tureen of bouillon;
... s
Witness Issar-šumu-iddina, scribe.
Ditto, ditto; ditto, ditto; ditto, ditto; ditto, ditto; ditto, ditto; ditto, ditto; ditto, ditto; ditto, ditto; ditto, ditto; ditto, ditto; ditto, ditto; ditto, ditto; ditto, ditto; ditto, ditto; ditto, ditto; ditto, ditto; ditto, ditto; ditto, ditto; ditto, ditto; ditto, ditto; ditto, ditto; ditto
Now then I am writing to the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
Ditto by the goddess Ištar, who in the presence of the king, my lord,
Unfavorable.
... he has given
Witness Šarrat-...
(As for) the one who alters my inscribed object (and) disrespects my words, may the god Aššur, my lord, overthrow his kingship, curse him angrily, and make his name (and) his seed disappear from the land.
... Anisus ...
Whoever alters the wording of this tablet, or sins against the treaty of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, and his sons and grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Mannu-ki-ahhešu, his sons and grandsons,
Witness Na'di-ilu.
I roofed it with magnificent beams of cedar (and) cypress, whose scent is sweet, product(s) of Mount Amanus and Mount Sirāra, the holy mountains. I fastened bands of silver (and) copper on doors of white cedar (and) cypress and I installed (them) in its gates. I made (them) resplendent (and) made (them) shine like daylight.
... woman ...
... the land of Akkad ...
... the son of Yakin ...
Witness Remanni-ilu.
The priest of the temple of Dagan is saying: "The king of Elam ...
... in the land of Akkad ...
they have ...
Disregard that the king, my lord, is in the middle of the sea, or in the middle of the mountains...
... the king of the lands, the god Marduk, ... the king of the lands, the god Marduk ... the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands,
... I have now written to you. ... I have now written to you.
... the sons of his brothers
Nabonidus, king of Babylon,
... to the king ...
Total, of the estate of Sin-ahhe-iddina.
to ...
I have now written to the Palace, my lord. May my lord do as he finds appropriate.
Urad-Ea, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Nabû-zeru-ibni, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Ilu-šalimanni, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Šalimanni, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-duru-uṣur, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-duru-uṣur, vice-regent of
If Mars stands in Scorpius: the king of Akkad ...
Witness Šarru-Issar, ...
1 talent of copper, 1 mina of wool, 1 mina of iron, 1 mina of lead, 1 mina of gold, 1 mina of silver, 1 mina of copper, 1 mina of iron, 1 mina of lead, 1 mina of copper, 1 mina of lead, 1 mina of copper, 1 mina of lead, 1 mina of copper, 1 mina of lead, 1 mina of copper, 1 mina of lead, 1 mina of copper, 1 min
In the eponymy of Nabû-dūrī-uṣur, governor of the city Kalḫu (695), I marched against the land of the Qutu, which had rebelled against me.
At that time, I built a city in the district of the city Arbela, called Kār-Tukultī-Ninurta, (which is) on the shore of the Lower Sea, and named it Kār-Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I), (who was) also king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dān (I), (
Now ...
Witness NN, cohort commander.
On my return march, I placed Aššur-nādin-šumi, my first-born son (whom) the god Aššur and the goddess Ištar placed in my hands, on his lordly throne and entrusted him with the wide land of Sumer and Akkad.
... me ...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, should send the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the man whose name is written in this papyrus,
The troops of the Elamites are assembled in the city of ...
May the god Nabû, the august lord, look with joy upon this work and bless my kingship with his firm heart.
1 female scribe, 1 female scribe, 1 female scribe, 1 female scribe, 1 female scribe, 1 female scribe, 1 female scribe, 1 female scribe, 1 female scribe, 1 female scribe, 1 female scribe, 1 female scribe, 1 female scribe, 1 female scribe, 1 female scribe, 1 female scribe, 1 female scribe, 1 female scribe, 1 female scribe, 1 female scribe, 1 female scribe, 1
... he
The land of the Arabs is well; the forts are well.
... me
In the month Iyyar (II), ... th day, eponym year of Ṭab-šar-Aššur.
a flagon of bittersweet beer;
... the sun
Witness Šarru-emuranni, ša šēpi guard.
... I built (and) completed Esabad, the temple of the goddess Gula, my mistress, ... I built (and) completed Esagil, the temple of the goddess Mullissu, my mistress, ... I built (and) completed Ezida, the temple of the goddess Nanāya, my mistress, ... I built (and) completed Eanna, the temple of the goddess Nanāya, my mistress, ...
... the lands of the Qutu
From Ašaredu the older, son of Šamaš-šuma-ukin.
... seed grain in his mouth
Witness Adad-ša-Aššur, ...
Total, of Nabû-zeru-ibni.
... concerning ...
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... 30 hectares
... they have given to me ...
Total Aššur-Aššur-ibni, village manager.
Total, 1 hectare of arable land, 1 hectare under cultivation therein. 1 hectare under cultivation therein.
... they are saying: "...
... the king of Elam ... the land of Akkad ...
... I have heard that the king of Elam ...
... Now then
From Issar-šumu-ereš.
I have given ...
... the servants of the king, my lord,
... ;
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šarru-uṣur. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
On my return march, I placed Aššur-nādin-šumi, my first-born son (whom) the king of the gods, on his royal throne and entrusted him with the wide land of Sumer and Akkad. I made him sit on his royal throne and entrusted him with the wide land of Sumer and Akkad.
of the king ...
Witness Marduk-naṣir, ...
The money is paid completely.
... the king, my lord,
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
Witness Nabû-...
... he
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord!
3 bags of sesame;
Witness Addî.
... of Marduk-apla-iddina
... 1 and his people, ...
The lands Bīt-Bunakki (Bīt-Bunakki), Bīt-Šilāni (Bīt-Šilāni), Bīt-Šilāni (Bīt-Šilāni), Bīt-Šilāni (Bīt-Šilāni), Bīt-Šilāni (Bīt-Šilāni), Bīt-Šilāni (Bīt-Šilāni), Bīt-Šilāni (Bīt-Šilāni),
...
I have now written to the king, my lord, ...
... I built (and) completed Esagil, the palace of the gods, ... , which had become old and eroded. I completed its structure. I made its appearance(s) resplendent (and) made (them) shine like daylight. I made its appearance(s) resplendent (and) made (them) shine like daylight.
Bel-ila'i,
To the goddess Nanāya, his lady: Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, presented (this) for the life of Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria.
... the land of Akkad, the land of the Qutu, the land of the Uqumanu, the land of the Šubaru, the land of the Qabar, the land of the Qabar-ilu, the land of the Qabar-ilu-ilu, the land of the Qabar-ilu-ilu, the land of the Qabar-ilu-ilu, the land of the Qabar-ilu-ilu, the land of the Qabar-ilu-ilu, the land of the Qab
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
On my seventh campaign, I mustered my troops (and) took the direct road against Uaiteʾ, the king of the land of the Yasubigallians, who had cast off the yoke of my lordship (and) had not sent me his messenger. I mustered my troops (and) took the direct road against Uaiteʾ, the king of the land of the Yasubigallians, who had cast off the yoke of my lordship (and) had not sent me his messenger.
Witness ... , scribe.
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
... he ...
I surrounded (and) conquered the city Bīt-Kilamzaḫ, their fortified city. I brought out of it people, horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty. I destroyed, devastated, (and) turned into ruins their small(er) settlements, which were without number. I burned with fire the rest of them, (and) reduced (them) to ashes. I carried off their booty, possessions, property, herds, (and) flocks and brought
If the moon stands in a stable position: waiting for rain.
When the god Aššur ...
1, Šarrat-nipha,
And ... the one who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... , who ... ,
Witness Ahu-ahhešu.
The 10th day, when the moon was seen, is when the moon was seen.
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, ...
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments ...
From Balasî.
... the king, my lord, knows that ... in the presence of the king, my lord, ...
In the eponymy of Aššur-ila'i, governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, I brought about the defeat of the land of the Qutu, ...
I have now written to you, my lord. Let me ...
May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: I am well.
If Adad thunders in the evening: ...
... of ...
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II), (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dān (II), (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria, son of Aššur-uballiṭ (II), (who was) also
... and ...
Total, in the charge of Aššur-... , ... of the queen mother.
Witness Zarutî, servant of the chief cupbearer.
... son of Aya-ila'i, gardener; 1 woman; 1 daughter, of 4 spans' height; 1 suckling child; 1 woman, of 4 spans' height; 1 suckling child, of 4 spans' height; 1 woman, of 4 spans' height; 1 woman, of 4 spans' height; 1 woman, of 4 spans' height; 1 woman, of 4 spans' height; 1 woman, of 4 spans' height; 1 woman, of 4
I have heard that the king of Elam has gone to the city of Harran. I have heard that he is going to the city of Harran. I have heard that he is going to the city of Harran. I have heard that he is going to the city of Harran.
Palace of Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II), (who was) also king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dān (II), (who was) also king of Assyria, son of Aššur-uballiṭ (II), (who was) also king of Assyria
Witness Remanni-Issar, merchant of the governor of Arbela.
... who ... the land of Akkad ... I ... the deities Aššur, Mullissu, Bēl (Marduk), ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... ,
As to what my lord wrote to me: "...
I have given 10 hectares of arable land to the prefects of the land of Akkad, and they have cultivated it. They have given them to the prefects of the land of Akkad.
Witness Nabû-zeru-ukin, chariot driver.
... he
In the right side of the 'finger' there is a hole.
... he has given to them
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether ... Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, ...
... the month ...
The 'finger' is thick. The 'increment' ...
a cup of small onions;
10 hectares of arable land, 15 hectares under cultivation therein ...
— Saturn stands in Scorpius.
... 1 cloak, red, of the port, ...
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
1 woman ... ;
3 ...
I have now written to the Palace. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
The top of the 'finger' is split...
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, (and) king of the land of Sumer and Akkad —
The chief victualler of the House of Aššur has contracted and bought it for 1 1/2 minas of silver.
2 seahs of oil-bread, 2 seahs of beer for libations.
I have now written to you, and you should not be negligent.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the 10th day of this month Iyyar (II), of this year, the term stipulated for the performance of (this) extispicy,
They have brought me ...
I tore down that small palace in its entirety, (and) I changed the course of the Tebilti River (and) directed its outflow onto the meadow behind the city. I made the course of the Tebilti River flow through a canal into the meadow behind the city, and I made (it) gush through feeder canals into those of the meadow behind the city. I made (them) gush through feeder canals into those of the meadow behind the city.
I had the work of the god Kulla, the goddess Mullissu, and the great gods, my lords, done and I completed it. I had the work of the god Kulla, the goddess Mullissu, and the great gods, my lords, done and I completed it. I had the work of the god Kulla, the goddess Mullissu, and the great gods, my lords, done and I completed it.
Witness 1 ditto of sesame.
The troops of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, who are in ...
... to the king ...
... they are saying: "...
In the city Kalḫu, I built a palace for my lordly residence, which is in the middle of the city, and named it Egalzagdinutukua, “The Palace Without a Rival.” I named its foundation(s) Egalzagdinutukua, “The Palace Without a Rival.” I named its foundation(s) Egalzagdinutukua, “The Palace Without a Rival.”
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
a basket of fig-beer;
1 ditto of sesame;
... I have not heard any report yet.
An estate of 1 hectare of land adjoining the field of Mušezib-Nabû.
... 10,000 stalks of vine ...
... I have now written to you, ... , and you have not heard a word from me. I have now written to you, ... , and you have not heard a word from me.
... he ...
... I have given to me
... I ...
If Venus stands in the west wind: there will be an eclipse of the sun in the west wind.
of oil ...
... , NN, the bodyguard of the king, my lord, whom the king, my lord, sent to me, saying: "Let him go and fetch the rest of the people of the land of Akkad who are in your presence, and let them go free to the king, my lord" —
... the horses of the Elamites
To the king, my lord: your servant Gabbu-ana-Aššur-Aššur.
Land of Uruk, land of Eanna.
... the people of ...
Witness ... aya.
... Esarhaddon, king of Assyria.
1 seah 1 'litre' spiced bread.
... Venus is visible in the west.
1 duck, 10 turtledoves. A tureen of bouillon;
The daughter of the priest of the temple of Aššur.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Month of Iyyar (II), 5th day, eponym year of Gabbê.
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled and impaired in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
The horses of the temple of Dagan ...
Witness Nabû-zeru-ukin.
To the king, my lord: your servant Mannu-ki-ahhešu. Good health to the king, my lord!
I have now written to the Palace. Let my lord do as he finds appropriate. I have now written to the Palace, my lord, and am herewith writing to my lord.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have seen fear and terror at night, or (that) the oracle query has become jumbled and impaired in my mouth...
... the bodyguard
... 1000 ...
20 hectares, ditto, of field,
If the moon becomes visible in the path of the Enlil stars: the enemy's land will experience famine.
... Aššur-Aššur-bēl-kala, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-rabi (I), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Enlil-nādin-šumi (I), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-dān (I), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-uballiṭ (I), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Erība
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "...
I have now written to the Palace. Let my lord do as he finds appropriate.
When the king, my lord, sent me to Elam, I went to the city of Harran, and they gave me the following report about the Elamites: "The Elamites are in the mountains. They have not given us the tribute of the Elamites."
I have now written to the king, my lord, about the work on the fortresses. The king, my lord, may do as he wishes.
... the king, my lord, ...
The prefects of the king, my lord, are saying: "The prefects of the king, my lord, are not to go to the Palace. The prefects of the king, my lord, are to go to the Palace."
From Nabû-ahhe-eriba.
I had a stele bearing my name made and I engraved image(s) of the deities Aššur, Mullissu, Bēl (Marduk), (and) Nabû on it and I placed (it) in the city Kalḫu, which is on the border of the land Elam.
... Aššur-ila'i
... and ...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the 25th day of this month Iyyar (II), of this year, the term stipulated for the performance of (this) extispicy,
... of copper
Aššur-iddin,
They have now ...
Ubru-...
The king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let them give you the horses of the horses of the prefects of the horses of the horses of the prefects of the horses of the horses of the prefects of the horses of the prefects of the horses of the prefects of the horses of the prefects of the horses of the prefects of the horses of the prefects of the horses of the prefects of the horses of the prefects of the horses of the prefects of the horses of the prefects of the horses of the prefects of
Witness Issar-bani.
If a star stands in the sky: the king of the land will widen his understanding.
Moreover, I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, (and) king of the land of Sumer and Akkad —
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
... the people of Assyria ...
Palace of Tiglath-pileser, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rabi (II), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dān (II) (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria:
I had a stele bearing my name made and I engraved image(s) of the great gods, my lords, on it and I placed before them an image bearing my name. I made an image bearing my name and I placed it before them.
The middle of the 'finger' is split ...
... ;
... Mannu-ki-šalimanni
... Ahu-duri
... the Elamite
I surrounded (and) conquered the city Bīt-Kilamzaḫ, their fortified city. I brought out of it people, horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty. I destroyed, devastated, (and) turned into ruins their small(er) settlements, which were without number. I burned with fire the rest of them, (and) reduced (them) to ashes. I poured out awe-inspiring brilliance upon their ally, the king of the land El
I have now written to the Palace. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate. I have now written to the Palace, my lord, what I have seen.
I have now written to ...
I, Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria.
2 ditto of sesame;
Witness ... -ahhešu, scribe of the chief ...
1, the 3rd of Elul (VI), 3rd day.
I have now written to the king, my lord, about the people of the land of Akkad. I have now written to the king, my lord, about the people of the land of Akkad.
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the king, my lord. I have no one. I have no one.
I conquered the city Bīt-Ištar, which is on the border of the land Elam, (and) the cities Bīt-Aḫlamê, Bīt-Aḫlamê, Bīt-Aḫlamê, Bīt-Aḫlamê, Bīt-Aḫlamê, Bīt-Aḫlamê, Bīt-Aḫlamê, Bīt-Aḫlamê, Bīt-Aḫlamê, Bīt-Aḫlamê, Bīt-Aḫlamê,
To the king, my lord: your servant Sîn-ahhe-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur, Sin, Šamaš, Adad, Ber, the Assyrian Enlil and the Assyrian Ištar, bless the king, my lord!
I have now written to my lord about ... , saying: "Let me ... the work and ... the work ... Let me ... the work of the king, my lord, and ... the work of the king, my lord, and ... the work of the king, my lord, and ...
In the month of Ab (V), on the 3rd day, when ...
... you
silver, gold, (and) precious stones, as much as is needed (for making) burzigallu-bowls, (a stone) that had never been seen before, revealed itself at Kapridargilâ (“Dargilâ Village”), which is on the border of the city Tīl-Barsip, which is on the border of the city Tīl-ša-Abtāni, which is on the border of the city Tīl-ša-Abtāni, which is on the border of the city Tīl-ša-Abtā
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not write to me?" — I have now written to the king, my lord.
... 1 ditto,
The 'finger' is thick. There is a hole in the right side of the 'finger.'
Witness ... , ... , ... , ... , NN.
If Mars stands in Scorpius: the king of Akkad will be shut up in his palace.
... you ...
... to ...
The daughter of the goddess Nanāya, the beloved of the goddess Zarpanītu, the beloved of the goddess Zarpanītu, the beloved of the goddess Zarpanītu, the beloved of the goddess Zarpanītu, the beloved of the goddess Zarpanītu, the beloved of the goddess Zarpanītu, the beloved of the goddess Zarpanītu, the beloved of the goddess Zarpanītu, the beloved of the goddess Zarpanītu, the beloved of the goddess Zarpan
From Ašaredu.
... the king, my lord, ...
I have sent ... the men of ... to the Palace. They have not agreed to ...
... the goddess Nanāya, ...
Witness ...
... the 'third man,'
When the god Aššur, my lord, sent me to the city Kalḫu, I received from them the tribute of the lands Bīt-Bunakki (Bīt-Bunakki), Bīt-Kapsi (Bīt-Kapsi), Bīt-Sangi (Bīt-Šangi), Bīt-Urzakki (Bīt-Urzakki), Bīt-Kilamzaḫ (Bīt-Kilamzaḫ), Bīt-Kubatti (Bī
... and his people, ...
The woman Našuh-šarru-ibni, ...
... ;
An estate of ... , ... ,
Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I), (who was) also king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dān (I), (who was) also king of Assyria, son of Aššur-uballiṭ (I), (who was) also king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rabi (I), (who was) also
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-belu-ka''in. Good health to the king, my lord!
or ...
The goddess Nanāya, who is now ill, is ill because of the sunrise. May Bel and Nabû, the gods of heaven and earth, bless the goddess Nanāya, my lady! May they bless the goddess Nanāya, my lady!
To Esarhaddon, king of the world, my lord: ...
Witness Šulmu-šarri.
1 bag of sesame; 1 bag of kernels.
4 homers of roasted grain ...
Witness Ti'i-ereš, merchant.
I had the people of the lands that I had conquered dwell in quiet, and I made (them) dwell in safety in their abodes. I made (them) dwell in quiet, and I made (them) dwell in safety in their abodes. I made (them) dwell in quiet, and I made (them) dwell in safety in their abodes. I made (them) dwell in quiet, and I made (them) dwell in safety in their abodes. I made (them) dwell in quiet, and I made (them) dwell in safety in
Witness Banî, ditto.
Witness Arbailayu, servant of the vizier.
Witness Ubru-Nabû, merchant from Kišqu.
... Elam
... I ...
Witness Mannu-ki-Aššur, chariot driver of the crown prince.
they have given ...
... and
21 ... of the merchant ...
The 'path' is curled. The 'well-being' is destroyed...
... of the goddess Ištar
120, 1, the prefects of the Elamites; 100, 1, the prefects of the Gambuleans; 100, 1, the prefects of the Lihuqu; 100, 1, the prefects of the Qutu.
A 2-seah jar of hinhinu-seeds; Aššur-Aššur-iddina.
... he has not given
... I have now written to the Palace.
... 5 hectares, Ilu-naṣir, of the temple of Nabû.
... the people
Total, 2: the 'residences' of the 'residences' of the 'residences.'
... to the king ...
... my ...
I have sent ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... Arbela, Kurbailayu,
... the palace in Kar-Tukulti-Ninurta.
... s of copper, 1 copper ...
... the people of the land of Akkad ...
The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
I have now written to the Palace. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
... the 'well-being' is destroyed.
Moreover, I placed a eunuch of mine, the chief eunuch, on his lordly throne and entrusted him with the wide land of Sumer and Akkad.
This is the wording of the tablet. The wording of the tablet is good.
Witness Remanni-ilu, ditto.
The king, my lord, knows that I have no one in my entourage.
The ... of the king, my lord, is a servant of the king, my lord.
total, of ...
... of ...
... I have heard that ...
I had the gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), (and) Nabû, the gods who support me, dwell in Eḫulḫul, which is in the city Kalḫu, and I made (them) enter into Eḫulḫul, which is in the city Kalḫu, and made (them) reside in Eḫulḫul, which is in the city Kalḫu.
the people of ...
Witness Lu-balaṭi, ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Issar-šumu-ereš. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I have now written to you: be it you or your brothers or your uncles or your prefects or your cohort or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or
The daughter of Nabû-zeru-ibni, the maid of the queen mother, is saying: "The king of Elam is coming to Babylon."
1 woman (assigned) to Mannu-ki-ahhešu, for one mina of silver.
Land of the house of Dadi-ibni.
1 seah 10 'litres', spiced bread.
of the temple of Dagan.
... in the month of Iyyar (II), the 10th day.
In all, 2 men, owners of the ... being sold. The king, my lord, should ask them. They are ...
The city Kalḫu, which is on the border of the land Elam, which had rebelled against me and which I had conquered, I brought within the boundaries of my land (the territory stretching) from the passes of Mount Habruru to the land Gilzānu, which is on the border of the land Elam, (and) the cities Ḫatarikka (and) Ḫatarikka-šarrāni, which are on the border of the land Elam, (and) the cities Ḫatarikka-šarrāni (
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, descendant of Bēl-bābili (who was) also king of the world and king of Ass
1 woman, 1 daughter, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman,
Witness Marduk-ahu-iddina, scribe.
A cup of small onions; a cup of quinces;
May Aramiš, lord of the city, bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
The priest of the temple of Nineveh, the one who reveres the king, is saying: "The king, my lord, knows that I have no one."
... they are saying: "...
Damascus
Month Iyyar (II), 25th day, eponym year of Nabû-šarru-uṣur.
As for what you wrote to me: "Why do you say: 'Why do you say that you are the king's servants? You are the king's servants! You are the king's servants! You are the king's servants! You are the king's servants! You are the king's servants! You are the king's servants! You are the king's servants! You are the king's servants! You are the king's servants! You are the king's servants! You are the king's servants! You are the king's servants! You are the king
If Mars stands in the sky: the king of Akkad will be shut up in his palace.
4 hectares of sown land,
From Bel-ahhe-eriba.
Now then ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-reṣu'a. Good health to the king, my lord!
1 woman, ... , ... , daughter of ... , daughter of Ahu-uṣur, daughter of Ahu-uṣur, daughter of Ahu-uṣur, daughter of Ahu-uṣur, daughter of Ahu-uṣur, daughter of Ahu-uṣur, daughter of Ahu-uṣur, daughter of Ahu-uṣur, daughter of Ahu-uṣur, daughter of Ahu-uṣur, daughter of Ahu-uṣur, daughter of Ahu-uṣur, daughter of Ahu-uṣur
in ...
I have now written to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
11 people ...
the governor ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why ...
... I have now written to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
An estate of 2 hectares of land for 10 minas of silver.
What work ...
Witness Ilu-aššur-...
... I have now written to the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
...
... the town of Kišqu, in the charge of the village manager of Harran.
... the land of Akkad ... I have heard that ...
The god Aššur, the goddess Ištar, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the god
I ...
Witness NN, bodyguard.
Seal of ... , owner of the ... being sold.
1 female donkey, 1 male donkey, 1 female donkey, 1 male donkey, 1 female donkey, 1 female donkey, 1 female donkey, 1 female donkey, 1 female donkey, 1 female donkey, 1 female donkey, 1 female donkey, 1 female donkey, 1 female donkey, 1 female donkey, 1 female donkey, 1 female donkey, 1 female donkey, 1 female donkey, 1 female donkey, 1 female donkey, 1
1 bag of sesame; 1 bag of kernels; 1 bag of oil-bread.
... I have now written to the Palace
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
I built palatial halls of gold, silver, (and) bronze, (and) I named them “Palatial Halls of the Land of Sumer and Akkad.” I named them “Palatial Halls of the Land of Sumer and Akkad.”
To the goddess Nanāya, his mistress, has Aššur-bēl-kala, governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, son of Aššur-rabi (I), king of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, son of Aššur-dān (I), king of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, son of Aššur-rabi (I), king of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, son
If Adad thunders in the middle of the sky: there will be an earthquake in the land; the harvest of the land will prosper; there will be reconciliation and peace in the land.
... Y ...
... to me ...
... the sun ...
... of copper ...
May Bel and Nabû, who love Esagil and Ezida, bless the king of the universe, my lord!
I set Šarru-lū-dāri, son of Rūkibtu, their former king, over the people of the city Ashdod and imposed upon him the payment of tribute (and) gifts (in recognition) of my overlordship so that he (now) pulls my yoke.
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
When the god Aššur, my lord, gave me the strength to destroy the lands of the Uqumanu, Papḫu, and Qutu, I conquered the lands of the Qutu, the lands of the Uqumanu, the lands of the Papḫu, the lands of the Qutu, the lands of the Uqumanu, the lands of the Papḫu, the lands of the Qutu, the lands of the Uqumanu, the lands of the Papḫu, the lands of the Qutu, the lands of the Uquman
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
The son of Aššur-rabi (I), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Enlil-nādin-šumi (I), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-rabi (I), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-rabi (I), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-rabi (I), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-rabi (I), vice
... the bodyguard
Total, in the charge of Aššur-bani, chief scribe.
The bodyguard of the king, my lord, whom I sent to the Palace, has come to me. I have now written to the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
Witness ... , ... , ... , ...
of ... iya.
... he ... he ... he ... he ... he ... he ... he ... he ... he ... he ...
... of the land of Elam ...
... and his people,
If Adad thunders: the day will become cloudy.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did you not write?"
Witness Sakkannu, ditto ditto.
In the month of Tebet (X), 10th day, eponym year of Issi-Adad-aninu.
... I have not heard any report yet.
Witness Marduk-remanni, chariot driver.
If the moon is surrounded by a halo and Jupiter stands in it: the king of Akkad will be shut up in his palace.
In the eponymy of Aššur-da''inanni, governor of the city Kalḫu (647), I marched to the land of the Yasubigallians, who live in the city Tīl-Barsip.
... in the town of Aššur-Aššur-iddina.
The day ... , when ... the god ...
... Elam
If the stars of the sky stand in a stable position: the king of the land will widen his understanding.
and the town of Bit-Hamban ...
Moreover, I have heard that the king, my lord, is saying: "Why did you not write to me?" I have now written to the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the king, my lord. I have now written to the king, my lord, about the news of the king, my lord.
I have now written to the Palace. Let my lord do as he finds appropriate.
15 sheep, 1 duck,
... As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why do you ... the king, my lord, ...
If Mars comes close to Cancer: the king of the land will widen his understanding.
... to Assyria ...
... I conquered the city ... , which is on the border of the land Elam, ... I conquered the city ... , which is on the border of the land Elam, ... I conquered the city ... , which is on the border of the land Elam, ... I conquered the city ... , which is on the border of the land Elam, ...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Nabû-ahhe-iddina or his sons or grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Mannu-ki-ahhešu, his sons and grandsons,
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
... I have now written to you ...
An estate of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, who has now written the name of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, on this papyrus and placed it before your great divinity,
Witness Yašiya, son of Mušezib-ilu.
From Nergal-eṭir.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "You have not written to me about the news of the king of Elam" —
To the king, my lord: your servant, Sin-šarru-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Ištar bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
If Venus stands in the sky: the king of the land will widen his understanding; the foundation of the throne of the king of the land will become stable; the king of the land will widen his understanding; the foundation of the throne of the king of the land will become stable; the king of the land will widen his understanding; the foundation of the throne of the king of the land will become stable.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
... I ...
Witness Bel-...
Witness Šarru-ibni, ditto.
I placed ... 100 of their ... I brought out ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ... their ...
... he has not given
This is from the series.
and the woman Bibê, his servant.
(As for) Bēlšunu, son of Bunnannū, a Gambulian whose father had fled to the land Elam before the father of the father who had engendered me, (and) (whom) my father, the father who had engendered me, had installed as king of the land Elam, (and) (whom) my father, the father who had engendered me, had installed as king of the land Elam, (and) (whom) my father, the father who had engendered me, had installed as king of the
If the moon is seen in Elul (VI) on the 30th day: dispersal of Subartu, the Westland, and the land of the Yoke.
The king of the lands, my lord, knows that I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have
1 prayer bowl ditto;
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ahhe-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
Witness ... , prefect of the crown prince.
1,400 stalks of vine ...
Aššur-ila'i, prefect of the land of Ruṣapu.
This year ...
at the disposal of Sagab (65).
10 ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto
(As for) Mannu-ki-ahhešu, the son of Ilu-eṭir, the son of Ilu-šallimanni, the son of Ilu-šallimanni, the son of Ilu-šallimanni, the son of Ilu-šallimanni, the son of Ilu-šallimanni, the son of Ilu-šallimanni, the son of Ilu-šallimanni, the son of Ilu-šallimanni, the son of Ilu-šallimanni, the son of Ilu
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why ...
... you
I have now written to the Palace in Arbela.
In the top of the left surface of the 'finger' there is a hole. The 'finger' is thick. The upper part is elevated...
... I have given ... to them. Now ...
Witness Šulmu-ahhešu.
Month of Iyyar (II), 1st day, eponym year of Sennacherib, king of Assyria.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
... I have now written to you ...
... they
Witness Šar-ilu, scribe of the house of Aššur.
... who ...
... he ...
If a snake is seen in the temple of Ištar: there will be reconciliation and peace in the land.
the town of ...
A tablet of Aššur-zeru-ibni to the Palace in Nineveh:
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have seen fear and terror at night, or (that) the oracle query has become jumbled and impaired in my mouth...
You shall not ... , you shall not ... , you shall not ... , you shall not ... , you shall not ... , you shall not ... , you shall not ... , you shall not ... , you shall not ... , you shall not ... , you shall not ... , you shall not ... , you shall not ... , you shall not ... , you shall not ... , you shall not ... , you shall not ... , you shall not ... , you shall not ... , you shall not ... , you shall not ... , you shall not ... , you shall not ... , you shall not ... , you shall not ... , you shall not
Witness Marduk-šarru-uṣur, chief ...
... what ...
... house ...
3 ditto, red, of the port;
the governor of ...
... the king, my lord
... of the king ...
1 hectare of arable land, 1 hectare under cultivation therein.
I surrounded (and) conquered the city Bīt-Kilamzaḫ, their fortified city. I brought out of it people, horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty. I destroyed, devastated, (and) turned into ruins their small(er) settlements, which were without number. I burned with fire the rest of them, (and) reduced (them) to ashes. I made their smoke cover the wide heavens like a heavy cloud.
I have now written to the Palace.
... me
... I have now written to the Palace.
10 ...
... the people of the land of Akkad
Now, in the month of Aššur-ila'i, the king, my lord, knows that I have no one in my entourage.
The work on the fortresses is in progress. They are working on the fortresses.
who ...
... they are saying: "...
5 ditto of sesame; 1 ditto of poplarar; 1 ditto of fig-beer; 1 ditto of small onions; 1 ditto of quinces; 1 ditto of olives.
... the land of Sumer and Akkad ... the land of Sumer and Akkad ... the land of Sumer and Akkad ... the land of Sumer and Akkad ...
... of Marduk-šuma-iškun
I have heard that the king, my lord, is saying: "Why did you not write to me?" I have now written to the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
I have given orders to the magnates of the country, saying: "You are the king's servants. You are the king's servants. You are the king's servants. You are the king's servants."
... I have now written to the Palace. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
And when you are to strew salt and cress on the censer, you say: “Aššur, bless the king, my lord! May Aššur bless the king, my lord!”
... I conquered the city Bīt-Kilamzaḫ, their fortified city, and I brought out of it people, horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty.
I have now written to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
Palace of Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria.
Palace of Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, descendant of Būr-Aššur (II), king of the world, king of Assyria
adjoining the field of NN,
As to the ... of the city of Harran about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let them give it to you!" —
I ...
Witness Banaya, ...
...
Total, 19 gods of the house of Dagan.
Witness Aššur-zeru-ukin.
a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
I have now written to you, and you can be glad.
1 ... , royal bodyguard;
In the month Iyyar (II), the 10th day, when the moon was seen, is when the moon was seen.
From Nabû-šuma-iškun.
Total, in the charge of Yabâ.
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
Witness Ilu-eriba, merchant.
On my return march, I defeated Šūzubu (Mušēzib-Marduk), a Chaldean who lives in the marshes, at the city Bittūtu. As for him, terror of doing battle with me fell upon him and (iii 10) he fled alone like a lynx and his (hiding) place could not be found. He fled alone like a lynx and his (hiding) place could not be found.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šarru-uṣur. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: ...
... Esarhaddon, king of Assyria.
May the goddess Nanāya, the august lady, look with joy upon this work and bless my kingship.
Shalmaneser, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (II), (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-dān (II), (who was) also vice-regent of A
... of the goddess Gula
If the stars of the sky stand in a stable position: waiting for rain and flood will be the order of the land; the king of the land will widen his understanding.
and the rest of ...
Witness Aya...
(As for) Nabû-šarru-uṣur, chief eunuch, the one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, the one who administers correctly the cult centers, the one who bears the responsibility for the cult centers, the one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, the one who bears the responsibility for the cult centers, the one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, the one who bears the responsibility for the cult centers, the one who bears the responsibility for the cult centers, the one who bears the responsibility for the cult centers, the one who bears the responsibility
5 minas of silver, 10 togas, 10 tunics, 10 togas, 10 tunics, 10 tunics, 10 tunics, 10 tunics, 10 tunics, 10 tunics, 10 tunics, 10 tunics, 10 tunics, 10 tunics, 10 tunics, 10 tunics, 10 tunics, 10 tunics, 10 tunics, 10 tunics, 10 tunics,
You shall love Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, your lord, like yourselves. You shall not set up any other king or any other lord over you, and you shall not swear an oath to any other king or any other lord. You shall not set up any other king or any other lord over you, and you shall not swear an oath to any other king or any other lord.
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
1 ... of ...
Total 4 witnesses, owners of the village being sold.
Total, 140 hectares of arable land ...
Now then I am writing to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-šar-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord!
they have ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
... I have now written to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
... they have given ...
... I have heard that ...
The people of ...
The money is paid completely. That field is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
An estate of 1 hectare of land in the environs of Harran, adjoining the field of the domestics of the land of Harran,
Witness Šer-šallimanni, ...
If the king, my lord, so orders, I shall fetch the rest of the barley and bring it to the king, my lord.
... the daughter
... Bel-ereš ...
... and to Elam ...
There is a hole in the left side of the 'finger.'
The money is paid completely. That woman is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-Aššur-ibni. Good health to the king, my lord!
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why do you say: 'I have no one to go to the Palace'? Now then I have written to the Palace, and they have given me orders to go and see the king, my lord.
2 wooden boxes with copper inlays,
Month Ab (V), 5th day, eponym year of Dadî, governor of Damascus.
... Sennacherib ...
Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, ...
The breast-bone is thick...
Ahu-le'uti, servant of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria.
... you ...
... I, Ashurbanipal, ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ...
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
3 hectares of arable land, 1 hectare under cultivation therein.
Witness Mananu.
On my return march, I placed Aššur-nādin-šumi, my first-born son, on his lordly throne and entrusted him with the wide land of Sumer and Akkad. I made him sit on his royal throne and entrusted him with the wide land of Sumer and Akkad. I made him sit on his royal throne and entrusted him with the wide land of Sumer and Akkad.
in the town of ...
shall place 10 minas of silver (and) one mina of gold in the lap of Ištar of Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Total, 1 hectares of arable land, 1 hectare under cultivation therein, 1 hectare under cultivation therein, 1 hectare under cultivation therein, 1 hectare under cultivation therein, 1 hectare under cultivation therein, 1 hectare under cultivation therein, 1 hectare under cultivation therein, 1 hectare under cultivation therein, 1 hectare under cultivation therein, 1 hectare under cultivation therein, 1 hectare under
they have given ...
Witness NN, scribe of the crown prince.
Aššur-ila'i, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-bēl-kala, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-rabi (I), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-dūr-paniya (I), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-rabi (I), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-rabi (I), vice-
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, ... , who reveres the god Aššur and the goddess Mullissu, ...
... this ...
1, 12 oxen, 10 sheep,
The gods Aššur, Bēl (Marduk), (and) Nabû granted me a reign without equal and gave me the strength (lit. “the strength of the god Aššur”) to destroy the lands of the Uqumanu (tribe).
I have now written to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate. I have now written to the Palace, my lord, and am herewith writing to the king, my lord.
... to the king, my lord
The money is paid completely. That woman is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
2 minas of copper, 1 copper bowl:
The money is paid completely. That ...
of the town of ...
17 hectares of sown land.
Witness Banî, ša šēpi guard.
I carried off people, horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats without number from the city Ḫatarikka and I brought (them) to my city Aššur. I made them take up hoe and basket and they made bricks.
The 'well-being' is destroyed.
... in the presence of my lord ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why do you ... the men of the king, my lord, ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. Good health to the king, my lord!
I have now written to the king, my lord, about what I heard. I have now written to the king, my lord, about what I heard.
(As for) the land of the Arameans, which is in the middle of the sea, ... , I conquered ... , I carried off their booty, possessions, property, herds, flocks, ...
Aššur-Aššur, Aššur-Aššur, Aššur-Aššur, Aššur-Aššur, Aššur-Aššur, Aššur-Aššur, Aššur-Aššur, Aššur-Aššur, Aššur-Aššur, Aššur-Aššur, Aššur-Aššur, Aššur-Aššur, Aššur-Ašš
... he has not given ...
... Ubru-...
... you ...
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, who reveres him, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, who reveres him, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, who reveres him, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, who reveres him, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods
... star
the sons of the land of Akkad ...
... you ...
Witness Ubru-Nabû.
... he ...
Witness Milqî.
I carried off people, horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats without number from the land Elam and I brought (them) to Assyria. I made the people of the land Elam bow down to my yoke (and) they (now) pull my yoke. I made them carry baskets ( earth) and they made bricks. I made bricks in brickmolds of ivory, boxwood, ebony, (and) musukkannu-wood and I made (them) in brickmolds of ivory, boxwood
When the king, my lord, was in the presence of Aššur-naṣir, I was staying overnight in Harran. I have now written to the king, my lord, what I heard.
— Saturn stands in Scorpius.
If the Pleiades stand in the halo of the moon: there will be an eclipse.
Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, the one who built Egallammes, the one who built Eanna, the one who built Eanna, the one who built Eanna, the one who built Eanna, the one who built Eanna, the one who built Eanna, the one who built Eanna, the one who built Eanna, the one who built Eanna, the one who built Eanna, the one who built Eanna, the one who
... ditto, red, of the port;
If Venus stands in the sky: the harvest of the land will prosper.
The top of the left surface of the 'finger' is split ...
... I had the statues of the deities Aššur, Mullissu, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, (and) Nusku fashioned from white limestone that was discovered in the territory of the city Balāṭāya and their appearance(s) perfected through the workmanship of the deities Nudimmud (Ea), (and) Damkina.
... 10 hectares of arable land ...
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
The king, my lord, knows that I have no scribe in my hands. I have no one in my hands. I have no scribe in my hands.
Witness ... -...
The land of the king, my lord, is well.
to my father ...
With the support of the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar (Ištar), Ninurta, Nusku, (and) Nergal, I advanced and marched against Uaiteʾ (Iautaʾ), the king of the land of the Yasubigallians, who had cast off the yoke of my lordship (and) had not sent his messenger to me. I conquered the land of the Yasubigallians, which is on the border of
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nadin-šumi. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
On the 10th day, when the king went to the Palace, I heard that the king, my lord, had given me orders to go and bring the tribute.
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods,
and ...
... the king, my lord, knows that ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Balasî. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Witness Nabû-taklak, ditto.
Witness Ilu-eṭir.
4 oxen ...
The 7th of Elul (VI).
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Ša-Adad-aninu.
In the city Kalḫu, I built a palace for my lordly residence, and named it Egalzagdinutukua, “The Palace Without a Rival.”
Seal of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria.
In the future, may a later prince, when that wall becomes old and eroded, restore it.
... I have not heard any report yet ...
...
A tablet of Ašaredu to the vizier, my lord: Good health to my lord! Say to my lord:
I have now written to the Palace ...
... Mannu-ki-...
I surrounded (and) conquered the city Bīt-Kilamzaḫ, their fortified city. I brought out of it people, horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty. I destroyed, devastated, (and) turned into ruins their small(er) settlements, which were without number.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
(As for) Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver of Assyria, son of Aššur-da''inanni (I), chief chariot driver of Assyria, son of Aššur-bēl-kala, (who was) also chief chariot driver of Assyria, (who) has contracted and bought from Aššur-šallimanni for one mina of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
I have now written to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
... of Bel ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "You have not sent me the news of the king of Elam, so I have not heard it" —
In the future, in far-off days, may Aššur, the great lord, ... , look with joy upon this work with pleasure and may he bless Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, and may he bless the kings, my lords.
Arrapha.
I have now written to the Palace. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate. I have now written to the king, my lord, what I have seen.
... the king, my lord,
If the star of Anu ...
If Venus stands in Scorpius: the enemy's land will experience famine.
Total, 7 of 1 ...
Total 6:
... the king, my lord, knows
of the king, my lord ...
... you ...
Witness Ubru-... , scribe of the town of Harran.
to ...
... they have given ...
Now then I am writing to you: be it you or your sons or your grandsons or your brothers or your nephews or your prefects or your ... or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your pre
I have now written to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate. I have now written to the Palace, my lord, and am herewith writing to the Palace, my lord.
... I have now written to you
The 'well-being' is destroyed.
... , 1 horse, 1 mule, 1 donkey, 1 ox, 10 sheep, 10 goats, 1 duck, 10 turtledoves.
The priest of the temple of Dagan ... , the priest of the temple of Dagan, the priest of the temple of Dagan, the priest of the temple of Dagan, the priest of the temple of Dagan, the priest of the temple of Dagan, the priest of the temple of Dagan, the priest of the temple of Dagan, the priest of the temple of Dagan, the priest of the temple of Dagan, the priest of the temple of Dagan, the priest of the temple of Dagan, the priest of the temple of Dagan, the priest of the temple of Dagan, the
On my return march, I placed Aššur-nādin-šumi, my first-born son (whom) I raised on my (own) knee, on his lordly throne and entrusted him with the wide land of Sumer and Akkad.
... he has given ...
The land of the king, my lord, is well.
... s of copper, ... ;
On my return march, I defeated Šūzubu (Mušēzib-Marduk), a Chaldean who lives in the marshes, at the city Bittūtu. As for him, terror of doing battle with me fell upon him and (iii 10) he became distressed. He fled alone like a lynx and his (hiding) place could not be found.
... I have not heard ...
... in ...
... I carried off their booty, possessions, property, herds, flocks, (and) fluting wings without number and brought (them) to my city Aššur. I made them take up hoe and basket and they made bricks. I made bricks in brickmolds of ivory, boxwood, ebony, (and) musukkannu-wood and I made (them) in brickmolds of ivory, boxwood, ebony, (and) musukkannu-wood. I made bricks in brickmolds of ivory
... the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why ...
If the star of Anu stands in the sky: there will be reconciliation and peace in the land.
who ...
The city of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, who reveres the god Aššur and the great gods, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, who reveres the great gods, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, who reveres the great gods, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, who reveres the great gods, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of
Witness Banî, cohort commander.
... the land of Akkad ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why ...
10 ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto
Witness Ša-Aššur-...
Now, as to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why ...
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad,
2 homers, the scribe of the chief cupbearer.
... ;
I am herewith writing to the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
Witness Šiššu-ahhe-ahhešu.
... the land of Akkad ... I, Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, descendant of Būr-Sagab (II), king of the world, king of Assy
I am writing to the king, my lord, as the king, my lord, wrote to me. I have now written to the king, my lord, as the king, my lord, wrote to me. I have now written to the king, my lord, as the king, my lord, wrote to me.
As to ... about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me, I have now written to him, and he has given me the following report about him:
... and ...
Witness Mušezib-Aššur.
I had a stele bearing my name made and I engraved image(s) of the deities Aššur, Mullissu, Bēl (Marduk), (and) Nabû on it and I placed (it) in the midst of the city, Aššur, and (thus) made (it) an object of wonder for all of the people. I made (it) shine like daylight and made (it) resplendent. I made (it) shine like daylight and made (it) resplendent. I made (it) shine like day
1 sisalhu ox, 1 male sheep, 1 female sheep.
... the land of Akkad ...
The king of the land Elam heard about the advance of my expeditionary force, and fear and terror fell upon him. He abandoned the city Madaktu, his royal city, and set out for the city Ḫaydala, which is in the mountains. He crossed the Idide River, which is in flood, and established that river as his defensive position. He made the people of his land take up hoe and basket and they made bricks.
... the land of Akkad
The god Aššur, the goddess Ištar, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the god Nabû, the goddess Nanāya, the god Nabû, the goddess Nanāya, the god Nabû, the goddess Nanāya, the god Nabû, the goddess Nanāya, the god Nabû, the goddess Nanāya, the god Nabû, the goddess Nanā
... the king of Elam ...
If the star of Anu stands in the halo of the moon: there will be reconciliation and peace in the land.
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments ...
To the king, my lord: your servant, Bel-ahhe-iddina. May Bel and Nabû bless the king, my lord.
he ...
total ...
The horses which the king, my lord, sent to me
... I placed ... in the temple of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, and I dedicated (this) for my life and the well-being of my seed, my land, and my people.
... and
The king, my lord, knows that I have no scribe. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Witness Nabû-eriba-uṣur, ...
Witness Ubru-Inurta.
the village of Hiri...
... in the presence of ...
1 ... of wine,
... of the city of Harran ...
... the goddess Nanāya ...
... and their ...
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, the one who built Egalzagdinutukua (“The Palace Without a Rival”), the one who constructed the temple of the god Aššur, the one who built Esagil and Ezida, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, the one who built Eanna (“The House Whose Brill
... he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ... , he is ...
(As for) Tarḫun-Issar, the grandson of Issar-duri, the great grandson of Aššur-bēl-kala, the great grandson of Aššur-bēl-kala, the great grandson of Aššur-bēl-kala, the great grandson of Aššur-bēl-kala, the great grandson of Aššur-bēl-kala, the great grandson of Aššur-bēl-kala, the great grandson of
The gods of the house of Aššur.
When the god Marduk, the great lord, the goddess Zarpanītu, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess N
If Venus ... stands in the sky: there will be an attack of the enemy.
2 ditto of sesame;
20 minas, Qurdiya, scribe.
... I have now written to the Palace. Let the king do as he finds appropriate.
Witness ... -ibni.
1 seah 1 'litre' spiced bread.
The king, my lord, knows that ...
I roofed it with magnificent beams of cedar. I fastened bands of silver and copper on doors of white cedar and I installed (them) in its gates. I made (them) resplendent.
4 ...
... of the city of ... , which ...
The king, my lord, knows that I have no scribe.
To the goddess Nanāya, his mistress, has Marduk-nādin-šumi, king of the world, king of Ur, king of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, king of the four quarters (of the world), king of the universe, king of the four quarters (of the world), king of the universe, king of the four quarters (of the world), king of the universe, king of the four quarters (of the world), king of the universe, king of the four quarters (of the world), king of the universe, king
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have seen fear and terror at night, or (that) the oracle query has become jumbled and impaired in my mouth...
A 2-seah jar of hinhinu-seeds;
... the people of ...
As to what my lord wrote to me: "Why do you ... the people of ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Na'di-ilu. Good health to the king, my lord!
On the 29rd day, when the king sent me to the Palace, I went to the Palace.
... in ...
5 ditto — Ilu-šalimanni,
I, Aššur-belu-taqqin, governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, son of Aššur-rabi (I), king of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, son of Aššur-dān (I), king of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, son of Aššur-rabi (I), king of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, son of Aššur-rabi (I), king
... I ...
If on the 14th day the moon and sun are seen together: reliable speech, the land will become happy; the gods will remember Akkad favorably; joy among the troops.
Whoever alters the wording of this tablet, or sins against the treaty of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria,
... I
The silver ...
they are ...
... orchards ...
Witness Ahu-iddina, son of Šulmu-šarri.
I have now written to the town of ... , saying: "Let me ... the horses of the king, my lord, ...
I have now written to the Palace. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, who reveres the goddess Ištar, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, who reveres the goddess Ištar, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, who reveres the goddess Ištar, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, who reveres the
1 duck, 10 turtledoves.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
From Nabû-mušeṣi.
Palace of Sargon (II), king of the world.
I have heard that ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
The people of the land of Akkad are saying: "The king of Elam is in the land of Akkad."
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II), (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dān (II), (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria, son of Aššur-uballiṭ (II), (who was) also
The priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur,
Witness Bel-...
The new regular offerings.
I have now written to Esarhaddon, my lord, as follows: "Let me go and speak with you. Let me go and speak with you. Let me go and speak with you. Let me go and speak with you. Let me go and speak with you. Let me go and speak with you. Let me go and speak with you. Let me go and speak with you. Let me go and speak with you. Let me go and speak with you. Let me go and speak with you. Let me go and speak with you. Let me go and speak with you. Let me go and speak with
The god Aššur, the goddess Ištar, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the goddess Nanāya, the god
As for what you wrote to me: "Why do you say: 'Why do you say that you are not loyal to Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, and that you are not loyal to Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, and your sons and your grandsons, your brothers and your nephews, your family, your seed and your seed's seed, your brothers and your brothers' sons, your family and your family's family, your sons and your sons' sons,
From Nadinu.
... Nergal ... the goddess Nanāya ...
Witness ... -ilu, eunuch.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did you not write to me?" I have now written to the Palace.
Nabû-eriba, ... ; 1 woman; 1, ... ; 3, ... ;
Nabû-naṣir,
total ...
I have now written to the king, my lord, about what I heard. I have heard that the king, my lord, is going to the audience of the king, my lord.
In the left side of the 'finger' there is a hole. The breast-bone is thick...
... you
Witness Mušezib-zeru-ibni, scribe.
Witness Ahu-lâmašši, chief scribe.
...
The king, my lord, should ask the scribe of the palace. He knows that he has been in my presence.
1, of copper, 1 1/2 mina;
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
I had the support of the god Aššur, my lord, and I mustered my troops (and) I took the direct road against Uaiteʾ, the king of the land of the Arabs, who had cast off the yoke of my lordship. I had mercy on him and I did not cast off the yoke of his lordship. I did not cast off the yoke of his lordship. I did not cast off the yoke of his lordship. I did not cast off the yoke of his lordship. I did not cast off the yoke of his lordship.
Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the
Ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto
The king, my lord, can be glad.
In the left side of the 'finger' there is a hole. In the left side of the 'finger' there is a hole.
The money is paid completely. That woman is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... the 'third man,' the 'fourth man,'
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me, I have now written to the king, my lord.
To the king, my lord: your servant ... -ahhe-šallimanni.
This is from Aššur-Aššur-Aššur.
Now, I have written to the king, my lord, about what I have seen.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, should send the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the man whose name is written in this papyrus,
adjoining the field of Mušallim-Aššur, adjoining the field of Mannu-ki-ahhešu,
The 7th of Elul (VI), when the moon was seen, is when the moon was seen in the sky.
The king, my lord, knows that the servants of the crown prince, my lord, are not loyal to the king.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "...
If on the 14th day the moon and sun are seen together: reliable speech, the land will become happy; the gods will remember Akkad favorably; joy among the troops; the king will become happy; the cattle of Akkad will lie in the steppe undisturbed.
10 (of) sesame;
I have now written to my lord. May my lord do as he finds appropriate.
From Ašaredu.
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, descendant of Būr-Aššur (II), king of the world, king of Assyria
... the king, my lord, knows that the men who are in my charge are 100 men. They are the men of the king, my lord.
10 ditto ditto, red, of the port, ... ;
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract,
The palace of Shalmaneser, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dān (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assy
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
1 ... , 1 ... , 1 ... ,
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, who reveres the god Aššur and the goddess Mullissu, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, who reveres the lord of lords, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, who reveres the king of the gods, who reveres the king of the kings, who reveres the king of the kings, who reveres the king of the kings, who rever
The chief victualler of the queen mother, my lady, should ask him.
Witness Nabû-ahhe-iddina, ditto ditto.
The cooks of the magnates of Elam
Now then I am writing to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
The goddess Nanāya, who in the eponymy of Aššur-iddin, governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, (and) who in the eponymy of Aššur-iddin, governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, (and) who in the eponymy of Aššur-iddin, governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, (and) who in the eponymy of Aššur-iddin
the towns of ...
... the land of the Arameans
Witness Šulî.
2 (of) sesame;
Month Iyyar (II), 25th day, eponym year of Sagab (651).
2 bags of sesame; 2 broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken broken
... of Elam ...
The governor of ...
The king, my lord, knows that the men who are in my charge are 100 men.
... I have now written to the Palace. May Bel and Nabû ...
Witness Ahu-iddina, conscript.
Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Ashurbanipal (II), strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon (II), (who was) also strong king, king of the universe, (and) king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib (II), (who was) also strong king, king of the universe, (and) king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), (who was) also strong
... I have now written to the Palace. Let my lord do as he finds appropriate.
(As for) the one who alters an inscription written in my name, may the deities Aššur, Mullissu, Bēl (Marduk), (and) Nabû not grant him a life of long days of happiness, good health, (and) joy of heart.
1 ditto of sesame;
Witness Mušezib-Aššur, ...
... they have given to me
... this ...
Witness Se'-ila'i, ditto ditto ditto.
Palace of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, who provides for Esagil and Ezida, who renovates Eanna, who provides for Eanna, who provides for Eanna, who provides for Eanna, who provides for Eanna, who provides for Eanna, who provides for Eanna, who provides for Eanna, who provides for Eanna, who provides for Eanna, who provides for Eanna, who provides for Eanna, who provides for Eanna, who provides for E
I have now written to my lord ...
... he ...
... the king, my lord, knows that I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one.
... of the son of Yakin
On my return march, I defeated Šūzubu (Mušēzib-Marduk), a Chaldean who lives in the marshes, at the city Bittūtu. As for him, terror of doing battle with me fell upon him and (iii 10') he fled alone like a lynx and his (hiding) place could not be found. I carried off his brothers, his family, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his brothers, his nephews, (and) his relatives without number and brought (them) to my city Ašš
... he has given to me
... the chief victualler ...
The king, my lord, knows that I have no scribe. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one.
... to Assyria ...
... and ...
... 50 donkeys
You shall not seize the hand of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, and put it in the lap of a goddess, nor seize the hand of a man, nor put it in the lap of a goddess, nor seize the hand of a man, nor put it in the lap of a goddess, nor seize the hand of a man, nor put it in the lap of a goddess, nor seize the hand of a man, nor put it in the lap of a goddess, nor seize the hand of a man, nor put it in the lap of a
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "...
... Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad,
1 grove of poplars; 1 hectare of arable land; 1 hectare under cultivation therein. 1 woman ...
... to ...
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, (or) have seen fear and terror at night...
Witness Aya.
1 woman, 1 daughter, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman,
Month of Iyyar (II), 12th day.
they are saying: "Why ...
... I have given to you ...
The land of the Arameans is well; the forts are well.
... I have now written to you, my lord. I have now written to you, my lord. I have now written to you, my lord. I have now written to you, my lord.
in Arbela ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šarru-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord!
From Nergal-eṭir.
... to Bel
4 ditto of sesame; 1 ditto of oil;
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
If Mars stands in Scorpius: the king of the land will widen his understanding.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Aššur-remanni-ilu or his sons or grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Mannu-ki-ahhešu, his sons and grandsons,
Month Iyyar (II), 28th day, eponym year of Aššur-naṣir.
3 bags of sesame; 1 bag of ...
Witness Nabû-kašir.
30 big loaves of bread;
... you
If the day reaches its normal length: a reign of long days ...
... the town of ...
... day ...
I have now written to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
Whoever alters the wording of this tablet, or sins against the treaty of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, and his sons and grandsons,
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the king, my lord. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the 10th day of this month Iyyar (II), of this year, the term stipulated for the performance of (this) extispicy —
1 homer of barley for 1 homer of barley for 1 homer of barley for 1 homer of barley for 1 homer of barley for 1 homer of barley for 1 homer of barley for 1 homer of barley for 1 homer of barley for 1 homer of barley for 1 homer of barley for 1 homer of barley for 1 homer of barley for 1 homer of barley for 1 homer of barley for 1 homer of barley for
This is from the series.
... I
If Adad thunders in ...
Disregard that ...
... , 1 bodyguard, 10 (of) the crown prince;
... when the god ...
who to ...
The priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur,
Witness Nabû-zeru-ibni, chief cook.
The daughter of Issar-duri, who was in the presence of the king, my lord, is saying: "The king, my lord, should ask us."
Witness Qaqâ, chariot driver ...
Total, of Remanni-ilu, ditto.
In the right side of the 'finger' there is a hole.
... me ...
... or the ...
(As for) the one who alters an inscribed object bearing my name, ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ...
Month of Iyyar (II), 8th day, eponym year of Bel-ušezib.
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Bel and Nabû bless the king, my lord!
An estate of ... hectares of arable land ...
For the god Marduk, his lord: Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria, built (and) dedicated (this) ... , which is inlaid with precious stones, ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... ,
Aššur-šarru-uṣur, ...
I have now written to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
... ni, farmer, and his people.
If the sun stands in the position of the moon ...
son of Aššur-nādin-šumi, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rabi (I), strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dān (I), strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rabi (I), strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rabi (I), strong king, king of the universe,
the prefects of ...
1 ditto, Nabû-ila'i,
... to the goddess
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, ...
... the king, my lord, knows that ...
I ...
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, descendant of Būr-Aššur (II), (who was) also king of the world and
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why do you say that the king, my lord, should ask you?"
If the moon becomes visible in Sivan (III) on the 30th day: dispersal of Subartu, the Westland, and the Kassites.
... with Urda-...
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
When the god Marduk, the great lord, the god Marduk, the great lord, the god Marduk, the great lord, the god Marduk, the great lord, the god Marduk, the great lord, the god Marduk, the great lord, the god Marduk, the great lord, the god Marduk, the great lord, the great lord, the great lord, the great lord, the great lord, the great lord, the great lord, the great lord, the great lord, the great lord, the great lord, the great lord, the great lord
... I will ...
... days
2 hectares, ditto, of kudimmu salt;
shall place 4 minas of silver (and) one mina of gold in the lap of Ištar of Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
If in Shebat (XI) Adad thunders: there will be an eclipse.
Seal of Šamaš-...
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract, whether Nabû-šarru-uṣur or his sons or grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Mannu-ki-ahhešu,
...
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract, whether Nabû-šarru-uṣur or his sons or grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Remanni-ilu, governor of Harran,
If the sun ...
Witness Tabalayu.
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why do you say that you have no news of the Elamites?" — I have heard that they are in the mountains. They have not yet come to me.
I have now written to the Palace. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
I have now written to you, and you should do whatever you can do.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
On my fourth campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me so that I mustered my numerous troops and ordered the march to the land Bīt-Yakīn. (iii 10') In the course of my campaign, I defeated Šūzubu (Mušēzib-Marduk), a Chaldean who lives in the marshes, at the city Bittūtu. As for him, terror of doing battle with me fell upon him and (iii 15') his heart pounded. He fled alone like a lynx and his (
The king of Elam ...
I conquered the city Ḫatarikka, which is on the border of the land Elam. I brought out of it people, horses, (and) mules and I counted (them) as booty. I destroyed, devastated, (and) turned into ruins their cities. I burned with fire the people of the land Elam, who had cast off the yoke of my lordship, and (then) I made them take up hoe and basket and they made bricks.
who in my presence ...
The king, my lord, should ask the scribe of the king, my lord. He knows that he is a servant of the king, my lord.
Witness Barruqu, ditto ditto.
and ...
... he
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
... they say
... the bodyguard of the king
An estate of 40 hectares of land.
The 27th day: ditto.
8 female donkeys,
... he has given ...
... the king to Elam
1 woman, 1 daughter, ...
8 hectares of arable land ...
Witness Qaqâ.
... the king, my lord ...
Witness Aššur-Aššur-uṣur.
... I sent ... to the city ... , which is in the middle of the sea, and I made them take an oath. I imposed upon them the yoke of my lordship (and) imposed upon them the yoke of my lordship. I imposed upon them the yoke of my lordship (and) imposed upon them the yoke of my lordship. I imposed upon them the yoke of my lordship (and) imposed upon them the yoke of my lordship.
to ...
If the moon at its appearance stands in a stable position: the king of the land will widen his understanding.
... of NN
1 woman, 1 daughter, 1 woman, 1 woman, ...
The city of Arbela ...
... all ...
An estate of Aššur-ašared, chariot driver, servant of the crown prince, owner of the house being sold.
Now then I am writing to you: ...
After I had finished the work of my lordly majesty, I invited the goddess Ištar, mistress of the goddesses, (and) the goddess of the city, the goddess of the city, the goddess of the city, the goddess of the city, the goddess of the city, the goddess of the city, the goddess of the city, the goddess of the city, the goddess of the city, the goddess of the city, the goddess of the city, the goddess of the city, the goddess of the city, the goddess of
What work ...
From Balasî.
Tablet of Bel-le'i to Nabû-šarru-uṣur, his brother. Good health to my brother! May Nabû and Marduk bless my brother!
I have now written to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
... he has given to you
... I sent ... to the land ... , saying: "Let me ... the king of the land ... , and let me ... the king of the land ... , and let me ... the king of the land ... , and let me ... the king of the land ... , and let me ... the king of the land ... , and let me ... the king of the land ... , and let me ... the king of the land ... , and let me ... the king of the land ... , and let me ... the king of the land ... , and let me ... the king of the land ... , and let me ... the king of
... the gods of Arbela, the gods of the king, my lord, are well.
Palace of Shalmaneser, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dān (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria
we ...
The king of the lands, the god Marduk, became angry with the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhešu.
... the son of Yakin ...
Adad-nārārī, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-uballiṭ (I), (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of Aššur, son of Erība-Marduk (I), (who was) also appointee
I have now written to you: be it you or your brothers or your uncles or your cousins or your prefects or your cohort commanders or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects or your prefects
... and ...
Witness Šarru-ibni, priest of Nabû.
Palace of Tiglath-pileser, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rabi (II), strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dān (II) (who was) also strong king, king of the universe, and king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rabi (II), strong king, king of the universe, and king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rabi (II), strong king, king of the
... and the land ...
... the king, my lord, knows that ...
... your ...
... to me ...
The king, my lord, knows that I have no scribe. I have no one. May the king, my lord, send one of his servants to me.
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad,
I had no rival among the princes of the four quarters (of the world), and I had no one to oppose me. I made the people of the lands ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... ,
An estate of ... hectares of arable land,
In the eponymy of Aššur-ila'i, governor of ...
If the moon at its appearance ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... and his people,
Witness Zarutî.
If the sun stands in the position of the moon: there will be reconciliation and peace in the land; the gods will have mercy on the land; the king of the land will widen his understanding; the foundation of the throne of the king of the land will become stable.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-belu-ka''in. Good health to the king, my lord!
... I have written to the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
Witness Silim-Aššur, ditto ditto.
to Elam ...
... the people of ...
Month of Iyyar (II), 5th day, eponym year of ...
... ditto ditto, 1 ditto, 1 ditto,
Witness Nabû-zeru-ibni, chief tailor.
1 sisalhu ox, 1 male sheep, 1 female sheep.
17 (men), 10 (donkeys), ...
Witness Nabû-ahhe-iddina, scribe.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nadin-šumi. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
The palace of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods.
2 black horses,
The land of the king is well; the forts are well. The king, my lord, can be glad.
They have given me orders to go and fetch them.
... I have now written to you.
Seal of Milqî, owner of the field being sold.
The palace of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, who reveres the god Aššur and the goddess Mullissu, and who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods.
I have now written to the king, my lord, about the news of the king, my lord. I have heard that the king, my lord, is in good spirits. I have heard that the king, my lord, is in good spirits.
The 20th day, when the king sent me to the Palace, I have not heard any report yet.
... Arihi ...
... to the city of Kar-Tukulti-Ninurta, ...
5 minas, ... , ... , ... , ... ,
From Adad-šumu-uṣur.
... the king ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ahhe-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
In the city Aššur-Aššur, in the district of the land of the Qutu,
... the land of Akkad ...
Aššur-... , Aššur-nadin-ahhe, Aššur-nadin-šumi, Aššur-nadin-šumi, Aššur-nadin-šumi, Aššur-nadin-šumi, Aššur-nadin-šumi, Aššur-nadin-šumi, Aššur-nadin-šumi, Aššur-nadin-šumi, Aššur-nadin-šumi, A
2 ...
Whoever alters an inscription bearing my name, ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ...
... Elam
40 hectares of arable land, 10 hectares under cultivation therein.
... ditto ditto, knotted, 1 1/2 mina;
On the 10th day, when the king goes to the House of God, he will perform the regular offering.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
6 hectares, 7 hectares, the town of Harran.
81 80 79 78 77 76 75 74 73 72 71 69 68 67 66 65 64 63 62 61 59 58 57 56 55 54 53 52 51 50 49 48 47 46 45 44 43 42 41 40 39 38 3
If the moon and sun are in balance: the king of the land will widen his understanding.
... s of the town of Harran.
shall place one mina of silver (and) one mina of gold in the lap of Ištar of Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
The priest of the temple of Dagan has contracted and bought from these men for 10 minas of silver.
Month Tebet (X), 25th day, eponym year of Mannu-ki-Adad of Harran.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why ...
... 1 1/2 minas, NN.
... I had a stele bearing my name made and I engraved image(s) of the deities Aššur, Mullissu, ... , the deities of heaven and earth, ... , the deities of the underworld, ... , the deities of the netherworld, ... , the deities of the apsû, ... , the deities of the ... , the deities of the ... , the deities of the ... , the deities of the ... , the deities of the ... , the deities of the ... , the deities of the ... , the deities
In the month of ... , ... th day, eponymy of ...
I had a stele bearing my name made and I engraved image(s) of the deities Aššur, Mullissu, Bēl (Marduk), (and) Nabû on it and I placed (it) in the middle of the city, where the deities Aššur, Mullissu, Bēl (Marduk), (and) Nabû dwell, and I left (it) for futuregenerations to be seen and read.
Bit-Hamban, 110 hectares of arable land.
As for the one who alters an inscribed object bearing my name, (or) sins against the treaty of the great gods, (or) alters the wording of the treaty of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, (or) sins against the treaty of the great gods, (or) alters the wording of the treaty of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, (or) sins against the treaty of the great gods, (or) alters the wording of the treaty of Esarhaddon, king of
If Adad thunders in the middle of the moon: there will be reconciliation and peace in the land.
I surrounded (and) conquered the city Bīt-Kilamzaḫ, their fortified city. I brought out of it people, horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty. I destroyed, devastated, (and) turned into ruins their small(er) settlements, which were without number. I burned with fire the rest of them, (and) reduced (them) to ashes.
If Venus ...
Witness Šulmu-ahhešu.
8 hectares of arable land, 1 hectare under cultivation therein.
total 11 ...
Witness Šulmu-šarri.
I have now written to the Palace.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nashir-ahhešu. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
... the land ...
... of Nabû-eriba
I ...
...
... I have now written to the Palace. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
5 mares.
Now then ...
... now
The troops of the Elamites are assembled.
The king, my lord, knows that I have no field in Assyria.
Witness ... -ahhe-iddin.
The city of Harran ...
The money is paid completely. The house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Witness Nabû-zeru-... , scribe of the crown prince.
... he has given
... of ...
... 1 wooden ...
... to ...
... Esarhaddon, king of Assyria.
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the king, my lord. I have no one in my hands. I have no one in my hands. I have no one in my hands. I have no one in my hands. I have no one in my hands. I have no one in my hands. I have no one in my hands. I have no one in my hands. I have no one in my hands. I have no one in my hands. I have no one in my hands. I have no one in my hands. I have no one in my hands.
...
Total — Nergal of Tarbiṣu.
If the moon is surrounded by a halo and Mars stands in it: the king of Akkad will be shut up in his palace.
Damascus
Seal of Na'di-ilu,
In the eponymy of Aššur-da''inanni, governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari ...
... I, Sargon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ...
... Yasubigallian ...
From Nadinu.
Month Ab (V), 1st day, eponym year of Šulmu-šarri.
all ...
in all, 4: the 'residences' of the ...
Witness Ubru-Nabû, keeper of the tablet.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, should send the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the man whose name is written in this papyrus,
To the king, my lord: your servant, Nabû-ahhe-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord.
The palace of Shalmaneser, king of the universe, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), king of the universe, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also king of the universe, son of Adad-nārārī (II), (who was) also king of the universe, son of Aššur-dān (II), (who was) also king of the universe, son of Aššur-uballiṭ (II), (who was) also king of the universe, son of Aš
Witness Ṭabiaya.
May the king, my lord, ... the people of ... , and may he ...
... the temple of the goddess Ištar ...
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Issi-Adad-aninu.
Witness ... , ... , ... , Bel-iddina.
Now ...
If the moon at its appearance stands in a stable position: waiting for rain.
155 (items): copper basins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper wash
As to what the king wrote to me: "Let the king ask you!"
Palace of Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods. Whoever alters an inscription written in my name, may the deities Aššur, Mullissu, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar (Ištar), Nanāya, (and) Uruk make his name (and) his seed disappear from the land.
... they are saying: "The town of ...
In the month of Aššur-naṣir, the day of the watch of the sun was cloudy, the day of the watch of the sun was cloudy.
An estate of 1 hectare of land, adjoining the field of Marduk-šarru-uṣur.
The 10th of Elul (VI), when the king sent us to the Palace, we have not heard any report yet.
total 6: the land of ...
... the town of Hatarikka,
On my return march, I defeated Šūzubu (Mušēzib-Marduk), a Chaldean who lives in the marshes, at the city Bittūtu. As for him, terror of doing battle with me fell upon him and (iii 10) he fled alone like a lynx and his (hiding) place could not be found. He fled alone like a lynx and his (hiding) place could not be found.
To the goddess Nanāya, ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-kašir-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
... they have given to you
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-Aššur-ibni. Good health to the king, my lord!
4 hectares of arable land, 1 hectare under cultivation therein.
... 2 ...
... here ...
10 ... , ... ,
... of ...
Month Elul (VI), 10th day, eponym year of Mannu-ki-ahhešu.
... in my presence ...
... I sent ... to ... , saying: "You ...
... the city of Harran ...
... here ...
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why do you say: 'The king, my lord, knows that I have no news of the king, my lord, yet'? Now then I have heard that the king, my lord, is in Babylon.
... we
... 20 hectares ...
... Assyria ...
May Aššur, father of the gods, who decrees the fates, decree an evil and unpleasant fate for you. May he overthrow your throne, curse you angrily, and make your name (and) your seed disappear from the land.
On my return march, I placed Aššur-nādin-šumi, my first-born son (whom) the god Aššur called to exercise kingship, on his lordly throne and entrusted him with the wide land of Sumer and Akkad. I made him sit on his royal throne and entrusted him with the wide land of Sumer and Akkad.
Witness Aššur-šarru-ibni, scribe of the governor.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
... concerning ...
Witness Aššur-Aššur-...
The palace of Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods.
Whoever alters the wording of this tablet, or sins against the treaty of the king,
On my return march, I placed Aššur-nādin-šumi, my first-born son (whom) I raised on my (own) knee, on his lordly throne and entrusted him with the wide land of Sumer and Akkad.
... I ...
... I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, descendant of Būr-Aššur (II), king of the world, king of Assy
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether ... Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, ...
4 litres of bread ...
Witness Barbari-Aššur, horse trainer.
... seed grain
The king, my lord, knows that the king, my lord, is the one who reveres the king, my lord. The king, my lord, knows that the king, my lord, is the one who reveres the king, my lord.
From Rašil the older, servant of the king.
Total, in the charge of the 'Lady of Cults.'
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... to Bel ...
140 ...
When the god Aššur, the goddess Ištar, the great gods, my lords, decreed a favorable fate for me, they commanded me to build the temple of the god Aššur, my lord, and I built (it) from its foundations to its crenellations. I completed its construction and made its appearance resplendent. I made its appearance resplendent (and) made its appearance resplendent. I made its appearance resplendent (and) made its appearance resplendent.
When the king, my lord, was in my presence, I wrote to the king, my lord, as follows: "The king, my lord, should ask the scribe of the Palace. He knows that he is a servant of the king, my lord."
Month Shebat (XI), 7th day, eponym year of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, governor of Sam'al.
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur.
... as ...
The king, my lord, should ask the scribe of the palace.
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur,
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why do you say: 'The king, my lord, knows that I have no horses'? The king, my lord, knows that I have no horses."
... total, of the 'residences' of the 'Lady of Cults.'
1 mina of copper, 1 1/2 mina of copper,
... I have heard that ...
Shalmaneser, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (II), (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-dān (II), (who was) also vice-regent of A
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-šar-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Ištar bless the king, my lord!
Disregard that the king of the lands, my lord, is a servant of mine, and that he is a servant of mine, and that he is a servant of mine, and that he is a servant of mine, and that he is a servant of mine, and that he is a servant of mine, and that he is a servant of mine, and that he is a servant of mine, and that he is a servant of mine, and that he is a servant of mine, and that he is a servant of mine, and that he is a servant of mine, and that he is a servant of mine, and
... the son of Yakin ...
... s, ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ...
Seal of Aššur-zeru-ibni, cohort commander of the chief cupbearer.
... 50 ...
... field ...
... the king ...
Two governors ... , the prefects of the city of Harran, ... , the prefects of the city of Arbela, the prefects of the city of Calah, the prefects of the city of ... , the prefects of the city of ... , the prefects of the city of ... , the prefects of the city of ... , the prefects of the city of ... , the prefects of the city of ... , the prefects of the city of ... , the prefects of the city of ... , the prefects of the city
... they ...
Disregard that ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why ...
Your servant Nabû-ahhe-iddina: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: I am well, the king, my lord, can be glad.
I have now written to the Palace about the work on the fortresses.
... the land ...
A tablet of Aššur-zeru-ibni to Aššur-zeru-uṣur, his brother. Good health to my brother!
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord!
... he has given to them 1 hectare of arable land in the village of Aya-ilu, in the district of Harran.
At that time, I had a stele bearing my name made and I engraved image(s) of the deities Aššur, Bēl (Marduk), (and) Nabû, the great gods, my lords, on it and I placed (it) in the temple of the god Aššur, my lord.
... the king, my lord,
Witness Baniya, scribe.
... the lands of the Qutu
of ...
... I have now written to ...
The scribe of the chief cupbearer ...
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Sagab (651).
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, should send Nabû-šarru-uṣur, chief eunuch, to the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, and whether he should go.
I conquered the city Bīt-Kilamzaḫ, their fortified city, which is on the border of the land Elam, and I brought out of it people, horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty. I destroyed, devastated, (and) turned into ruins their small(er) settlements, which were without number. I burned with fire the rest of them, (and) reduced (them) to ashes.
in the temple of Dagan ...
... me ...
they say: "We shall go and ...
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
May the god Marduk, the great lord, the god Marduk, the great lord, the god Marduk, the great lord, the god Marduk, the great lord, the god Marduk, the great lord, the god Marduk, the great lord, the god Marduk, the great lord, the god Marduk, the great lord, the great lord, the great lord, the great lord, the great lord, the great lord, the great lord, the great lord, the great lord, the great lord, the great lord, the great lord, the great lord
Whoever alters the wording of this tablet, or sins against the treaty of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, and his sons and grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Aššur-šallimanni, chief eunuch, and his sons, shall pay 10 minas of silver, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Your servant Aššur-šallimanni: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
... they ...
The king, my lord, knows that ...
In the future, may one of the kings, my descendants, whom (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar, the great gods, nominate for ruling over the land and people, and may they select (him) for kingship and ...
The 10th day, when ... the king, my lord, ...
... Now to ...
to ...
10 minas, ...
... of the goddess Nanāya
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract, whether Bel-iddin or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or his prefects or his cohort commanders,
Witness Nabû-ila'i, ...
I have now written to my lord in the hands of my messenger. May my lord do as he finds appropriate.
... I
Witness ... , scribe.
As to what Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, wrote to you: "...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šarru-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I have now written to you ...
Total, 40 hectares, the village of Dunni-Šamaš.
... s, 13 ...
I ...
To the governor, my lord: your servant Naṣiru. May Aššur and Ištar bless the governor, my lord!
... to Elam ...
... Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your servant,
Witness ... , scribe.
I had a stele bearing my name made and I engraved image(s) of the deities Aššur, Mullissu, Bēl (Marduk), (and) Nabû on it and I placed (it) in the temple of the god Aššur, my lord. May the deities Aššur, Mullissu, Bēl (Marduk), (and) Nabû bless the king of the universe, my lord!
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, who reveres the goddess Ištar,
The horses which ...
... to the city of Harran ...
I, Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, who provides for Esagil and Ezida, who renovates Eanna, who provides for Eanna, who provides for Eanna, who provides for Eanna, who provides for Eanna, who provides for Eanna, who provides for Eanna, who provides for Eanna, who provides for Eanna, who provides for Eanna, who provides for Eanna, who provides for Eanna, who provides for Eanna, who provides for E
I conquered the city Bīt-Kilamzaḫ, their fortified city, which is on the border of the land Elam. I brought out of it people, horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty. I destroyed, devastated, (and) turned into ruins their small(er) settlements, which were without number. I burned with fire the rest of them, and reduced (them) to ashes.
... s in ...
... the king, my lord,
... he has given
If Mars stands in Scorpius: there will be reconciliation and peace in the land.
... the king, my lord ...
to NN ...
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30rd day: dispersal of Subartu, the Westland.
Witness ... , son of Kiṣir-Aššur.
... the land of Akkad ... I ... the land of Akkad ... I ... the land of Akkad ...
1 woman, 1 daughter, ...
... I have sent to you.
Witness Qurdi-Aššur, ditto ditto.
I have now written to the Palace. Let my lord do as he finds appropriate.
Ashur-ila'i,
total, in the charge of ...
1 ditto of sesame;
... to the town of ... in the district of ...
I have now written to my lord.
Witness Aššur-Aššur-...
If the sun stands in the position of the moon ...
Palace of Shalmaneser, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dān (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria
... I have now written to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
The ... of the king, my lord, ...
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, who reveres him, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, who reveres him, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, who reveres him, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, who reveres him, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods
Your servant Našuh-šarru-ibni: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
Month Ab (V), 3rd day, eponym year of Sennacherib.
Witness ... -zeru-ibni, ... of the palace manager.
5 bags of sesame;
I made the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), (and) Nabû, the great gods, my lords, enter inside it (Eḫulḫulḫarrān) and I made (them) reside in Eḫulḫulḫarrān, which is in the middle of the sea. I made them enter into the presence of the god Aššur, my lord, and they (now) pull my yoke. I made them enter into the presence of the god Aššur, my
The king, my lord, knows that ... is not good.
At that time, I had a stele bearing my name made and I engraved image(s) of the deities Aššur, Mullissu, Bēl (Marduk), (and) Nabû, the great gods, my lords, on it and I placed (it) in the temple of the god Aššur, my lord. I made (it) shine like daylight and made (it) resplendent. I made (it) shine like daylight and made (it) resplendent. I made (it) shine like daylight and made (
... the people of the land of Akkad ... I brought out ...
... he is ...
... 10 hectares of arable land, 10 hectares under cultivation therein ...
Witness Remanni-Illil, servant of the chief cupbearer.
in the town of ... , 10 hectares of arable land ...
3 ditto of copper, copper;
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur, ditto ditto.
... in their presence
Palace of Shalmaneser, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dān (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria
200 sheep, 200 sheep, 200 sheep, 200 sheep, 200 sheep, 200 sheep, 200 sheep, 200 sheep, 200 sheep, 200 sheep, 200 sheep, 200 sheep, 200 sheep, 200 sheep, 200 sheep, 200 sheep, 200 sheep, 200 sheep, 200 sheep, 200 sheep, 200 sheep, 2
In the city Kalḫu, ... , which ... , ... , ...
(As for) Bēlšunu, son of Bunnannū, a Gambulian whose father was a rab mūgi, (and) who himself was a child of his father, I placed him on his royal throne and entrusted him with the wide land of Sumer and Akkad. I imposed upon him the yoke of my lordship (and) made him take the direct road against Aššur-bēl-kala, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, my lord.
... the land of Akkad ... the city of Akkad ... the land of Akkad ...
... before me ...
Now then I am writing to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
3 ...
In the temple of the goddess Ištar, the beloved of the goddess Zarpanītu, ...
... of Elam
The forts are well; the king, my lord, can be glad.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "You have not sent me the news of the Urarṭian, have you heard it?" — he is in the presence of the king, my lord.
Witness Zarutî.
... the bodyguard ...
I built (and) completed Esagil, the palace of the gods, (and) completed its design. I made (it) shine like daylight and made (it) resplendent. I made (it) shine like daylight (and) made (it) resplendent. I made (it) shine like daylight (and) made (it) resplendent. I made (it) shine like daylight (and) made (it) resplendent. I made (it) shine like daylight (and) made (it) resplendent.
Witness Nabû-zeru-ibni, chief confectioner.
You shall love Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, like yourselves. You shall not seize him and put him to death, nor hand him over to his enemy. You shall not seize him and put him to death, nor hand him over to his enemy. You shall not seize him and put him to death, nor hand him over to his enemy.
The Lady of Babylon, who in the temple of Aššur, in the temple of Aššur, in the temple of Aššur, in the temple of Aššur, in the temple of Aššur, in the temple of Aššur, in the temple of Aššur, in the temple of Aššur, in the temple of Aššur, in the temple of Aššur, in the temple of Aššur, in the temple of Aššur, in the temple of Aššur, in the temple of
The priest of Aššur, the priest of the temple of Aššur, the priest of the temple of Aššur, the priest of the temple of Aššur, the priest of the temple of Aššur, the priest of the temple of Aššur, the priest of the temple of Aššur, the priest of the temple of Aššur, the priest of the temple of Aššur, the priest of the temple of Aššur, the priest of the temple of Aššur, the priest of the temple of Aššur
From this day, the ... th day of this month ... of this year, to the ... th day of Sivan (III), the term stipulated for the performance of (this) extispicy —
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, ...
Witness Lu-balaṭ. Witness Aššur-...
which ...
I have not heard any report yet.
... of the people of the land of Sumer and Akkad.
... s of copper ...
An estate of 1 hectare of land in ...
I have now written to the Palace. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
... I have now written to you, and you have not heard a word from me. I have now written to you, and you have not heard a word from me.
The 10th day, when he went to the Palace.
1 woman, 1 daughter, 1 woman, 1 woman,
If he does not pay, he shall pay 10 minas of silver to the merchant.
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Mannu-ki-...
80 hectares of arable land in the environs of Harran, 10 hectares under cultivation therein. 10 hectares of arable land in the environs of Harran.
3 2-seah jar of hinhinu-seeds;
the sons of ...
... the king ...
Month Shebat (XI), 1st day, eponym year of Banî.
I have now written to the Palace.
... the work of the god Nabû ...
... in the town of ...
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
Witness Šulmu-šarri.
I have now written to you, my lord. I have now written to you, my lord. I have now written to you, my lord. I have now written to you, my lord. I have now written to you, my lord. I have now written to you, my lord.
I have now written to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
... I have given to ...
The 18th day.
The barley is in good condition. The barley is in good condition.
... to the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
Ahu-iddina,
... ;
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
... the land of Akkad ...
... I ...
May Aramiš, lord of ... , ...
... I have now written to you
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, should send Nabû-šarru-uṣur, chief eunuch, to the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity,
If the Pleiades ...
May Bel and Nabû, who dwell in Ešarra, bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
total ...
... in my presence ...
adjoining the field of Šarru-emuranni,
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. Good health to the king, my lord!
The land of Akkad is well; the king, my lord, can be glad.
I have now written to the king, my lord, about what I heard. I have heard that the king, my lord, is saying: "Why did you ... the people of ...
Now ...
9 female donkeys, 1 male donkey.
As to the chariot owners about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me, I have given them 10 chariots.
1 woman, 1 daughter, 1 woman,
... he ...
2 homers of roasted grain.
To the governor, my lord: your servant Naṣiru. Good health to the governor, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the governor, my lord!
I have now written to the king, my lord, about the ... horses which I sent to the king, my lord, and about the horses which I sent to the king, my lord, and about the horses which I sent to the king, my lord, I have now written to the king, my lord.
35 hectares of arable land, 10 hectares under cultivation therein.
of 120 ...
1 mina, Nabû-...
40 ditto, red, of the port;
The king, my lord, knows that the men who are in my charge are not the king's men. The king, my lord, knows that they are the king's men.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-zeru-ukin. Good health to the king, my lord!
Witness Ilu-eriba.
5 minas of copper for 10 hectares of arable land in the village of Aššur-eṭir, in the charge of Aššur-remanni.
... he has given
... I have ...
I have now written to the Palace. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate. I have now written to the Palace, my lord, and am herewith writing to the king, my lord.
To the king, my lord: your servant Našuh-šarru-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord!
1,200, the chief cupbearer;
...
Witness Nabû-eriba, ditto ditto.
in ...
... I have given ... to the horses of the king, my lord.
Mars ...
... and ...
... the village of ... , ... , ... , ... ,
... ditto ditto, red, of the port;
... I have heard that ...
... in their midst
... the governors
... s ...
The king's word to the Rašaeans old and young: I am well.
... this
... he has given to me
... of Nabû-nadin-šumi ...
... Aššur-... , Aššur-... , Aššur-... , Aššur-... , Aššur-... , Aššur-... , Aššur-... , Aššur-... , Aššur-... , Aššur-... , Aššur-... , Aššur-... , Aššur-... , Aššur-... , Aššur-... , Aššur-... , Aššur-... , Aššur-... , A
When the king, my lord, went to ... , they were staying overnight in ...
... this
... to the people of the land of Akkad
1 grove of poplars;
I have now written to the king, my lord, ...
I carried off people, horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, then I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, fortresses of his that I had plundered, and I gave (them) to the kings, my lords.
Damascus
If the star of the sky stands in the halo of the moon: the king of the land will widen his understanding.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
... 400 ...
... I have not heard any report yet.
... the city Arbela
... I
a cup of ...
... to the king, my lord ...
... Yabu-ahu-iddina
10 (items): copper basins, copper washbasins, copper tubs, copper pots,
1 ditto, 1 ditto, governor of ...
In the month Ab (V), the twenty-third day, eponymy of Aššur-ila'i, governor of Damascus (695).
10 minas of silver ...
... I have now written to the Palace ...
... I have now written to the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
... the king, my lord, ...
Witness Šulmu-ahhešu, ditto of the chief tailor.
Your servant Samsi: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: I am well, you can be glad.
I had a stele bearing my name and my royal image made and I engraved (it) with the work of the god Nudimmud and I placed (it) in the temple of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, and I left (it) for the future...
... the house of Marduk-šumu-uṣur ...
which ...
... in the land of Akkad, in the district of the city of Harran, in the land of the Yokeman, in the district of the city of ...
in all, 10 persons ...
... ditto ditto, the front red, of the port;
I have now written to you, and you have now written to me. I am now writing to you again. May Bel and Nabû bless you!
Now then ...
From Nabû-iqiša.
... of field, 1 woman, 1 daughter, 1 woman,
... the land of Akkad ...
1 woman, 1 daughter,
Witness Aššur-Aššur, ditto ditto.
If the sun ...
Total, in the charge of Aššur-šallimanni, chief scribe of Assyria, son of Ashurbanipal (II), king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon (II), (who was) also king of Assyria.
1, Nabû-eriba,
... 1 bag of ...
The money is paid completely. That field is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
...
... I have now written to you
... the king, my lord
... Bel-le'i
... the ... of the ... of the ... of ...
1 sheep, 1 spring lamb, ...
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
The king should ask the scribe of the palace.
1 grove of poplars ...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the 10th day of this month Iyyar (II), of this year, the term stipulated for the performance of (this) extispicy,
... house ...
In the eponymy of Aššur-da''inanni, governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, I marched against Aššur-nādin-šumi, king of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, who had cast off the yoke of my lordship. I brought about the defeat of his land (and) felled his warriors. I carried off his booty, possessions, property, herds, (and) flocks without number.
On the 14th day, when ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ...
... 1 seah 8 'litres' spiced bread.
In my ninth palû, I mustered my troops (and) took the direct road against Aššur-lēʾi, king of the land Kar-Tukultī-Ninurta (II), king of the land Šalḫalḫal, king of the land Marḫasa, (and) king of the land Ḫindānu. I brought about their defeat inside the city Tūbu (and) the city Tūbu-šalḫal, which are on the border of the land Mannea, (and) I plundered their booty
Disregard that ...
I have heard that the chief cupbearer has gone to the Palace. I have heard that he is going to the Palace.
I ...
I have now written to the king, my lord, about what I heard. I have heard that the king, my lord, is saying: "Why did you not write to me?" I have now written to the king, my lord.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
... the king, my lord, ...
I have now written to the city of ...
... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ...
... field
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did you say: 'The king, my lord, knows that I have no news of them yet'? Now, I have heard that they are in the city of Harran. They are keeping watch in the city of Harran.
... Now then
In the top of the right surface of the 'finger' there is a hole.
... the land of Akkad, which is in the district of the city of Harran.
I have now written to the Palace about the men who are in my charge. They are 100 men, 100 men, 100 men, 100 men, 100 men, 100 men, 100 men, 100 men, 100 men, 100 men, 100 men, 100 men, 100 men, 100 men, 100 men, 100 men, 100 men, 100 men, 1
Witness Nabû-nadin-šumi, chariot driver.
... he has ...
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place, or (that) unclean people have come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
Total 697 horses, 18 horses.
Palace of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods.
Aššur-zeru-ibni, son of Aššur-zeru-ibni, ... , servant of the crown prince, ... , keeper of the tablet of the crown prince, ... , keeper of the tablet of the crown prince, ... , keeper of the tablet of the crown prince, ... , keeper of the tablet of the crown prince, ... , keeper of the tablet of the crown prince, ... , keeper of the tablet of the crown prince, ... , keeper of the tablet of the crown prince, ... , keeper of the tablet of the crown prince,
If Venus stands in the halo of the moon: the king of the land will widen his understanding.
When the governor of Raši, my lord, came to me, I was staying overnight in the presence of the king, my lord. I have now written to the king, my lord, what I heard.
I have now written to you ...
14 ...
Nabû-ahhe-iddina,
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, scribe.
... I sent ... to the city ... , saying: "Let me ... the governor of ... , and let me ... the governor of ... , and let me ... the governor of ... , and let me ... the governor of ... , and let me ... the governor of ... , and let me ... the governor of ... , and let me ... the governor of ... , and let me ... the governor of ... , and let me ... the governor of ... , and let me ... the governor of ... , and let me ... the governor of ... , and let me ... the governor of ... , and let me ... the governor of ... ,
Now then I am writing to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
The priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur,
8 ...
The priest of Nabû has said: "The priest of the temple of Nineveh is saying: 'The priest of the temple of Nineveh ...
I will set out and go.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether ... , (should) Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, strive and plan, and send the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the man whose name is written in this papyrus,
the land of ...
I conquered the city Bīt-Kilamzaḫ, their fortified city, which is on the border of the land Elam. I brought out of it people, horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty. I destroyed, devastated, (and) turned into ruins their small(er) settlements, which were without number. I burned with fire the rest of them, (and) reduced (them) to ashes. I poured out awe-inspiring brilliance upon their ally
As to the ... horses which ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šarru-uṣur. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
The Elamites, who had not bowed down to my yoke, heard about the advance of my expeditionary force, and fear and terror fell upon them. They abandoned their cities (and) their trees and they flew away alone like bats to inaccessible place(s). They abandoned their property (and) their possessions and they brought about the destruction of their cities (and) their trees. They poured out awe-inspiring brilliance upon the allying mountains, which they had not bowed down to my yoke. They made their land smaller (and) they made their people
1 wooden ...
... of the king, my lord ...
Witness Mannu-ki-...
... this
If the moon and sun are in balance: the king of the land will widen his understanding.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Nabû-šarru-uṣur or his sons or grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Mannu-ki-ahhešu, his sons and grandsons,
Witness Nabû-šallimanni.
you ...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, should send the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the man whose name is written in this papyrus,
in all, 3 hectares ... , ... ,
For the goddess Nanāya, his lady: Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, who provides for Ezida, who renovates Eanna, who provides for Ezida, who provides for Ezida, who provides for Ezida, who provides for Ezida, who provides for Ezida, who provides for Ezida, who provides for Ezida, who provides for Ezida, who provides for Ezida, who provides for Ezida, who provides for Ezida, who provides for Ez
On the 8th day, when the king goes to the temple, he goes to the temple.
... s, 1 woman, 1 daughter, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman,
To the king, my lord: your servant Bel-ušezib. May Bel and Nabû bless the king, my lord!
... Marduk-šumu-uṣur ...
... and to ...
If the moon stands in a stable position: waiting for rain.
The ... of the governor of ... , the ... of the village manager of ... , the ... of the village manager of ... , the ... of the village manager of ... , the ... of the village manager of ... , the ... of the village manager of ... , the ... of the village manager of ... , the ... of the village manager of ... , the ... of the village manager of ... , the ... of the village manager of ... , the ... of the village manager of ... , the ... of the village manager of ... , the ... of the village manager of ... , the ... of the village manager of ... , the ... of
the scribe.
... he
I have now written to the king, my lord, as the king, my lord, wrote to me. I have now written to the king, my lord, as the king, my lord, wrote to me. I have now written to the king, my lord, as the king, my lord, wrote to me.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Total 1, in the charge of Ṣalmu-šarri-iqbi.
Disregard that ...
the men ...
In the month of Tebet (X), 1st day, eponym year of Dadi-ibni.
... Ištar ...
If Nabonidus ...
Seal of Nabû-ahhe-iddina, owner of the woman being sold.
If Venus stands in the west wind: the king of the land will be shut up in his land, and the enemy will ...
If Adad thunders in Iyyar (II), the 27rd day, when the moon is seen, in the evening watch: there will be an eclipse in the Westland.
... we shall go and ...
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
They have given them to Ahu-la-amašši ...
May Anu and Ištar, the great gods, bless the king, my lord! May they give to the king, my lord, long days of happiness, good health, and a just sceptre!
If Mars stands in Scorpius: the harvest of the land will prosper.
2 hectares of sown land,
Witness ...
... me ...
... the lord of ...
... the bodyguard ...
If on the 14th day the moon and sun are seen together: reliable speech, the land will become happy; the gods will remember Akkad favorably; joy among the troops; the king will become happy; the cattle of Akkad will lie in the steppe undisturbed.
If Venus stands in the position of the moon: there will be an eclipse of the Westland.
They are saying: "The chief ...
... the people of his land
May Sin, the great lord, who decrees the fates, decree an evil and unpleasant fate for you.
10 hectares, ...
1 grove of poplars;
... field in the village of Kišqu.
— Mars stands in Scorpius; this is its interpretation:
From Bulluṭu.
1 duck, 10 turtledoves. A tureen of bouillon;
... ...
and ...
In the future, may one of the kings, my descendants, whom (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar, the great gods, nominate for ruling over the land and people, and may they select (them) and nominate (them) for the shepherding of the land and people.
... , the land of Akkad, the land of ...
2 ditto ditto, knotted, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, dit
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have seen fear and terror at night, or (that) the oracle query has become jumbled and impaired in my mouth...
Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I), (who was) also king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dān (I), (who was) also king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rabi (I), (who was) also king of Assyria, son of Aššur-uballiṭ (I), (who
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II), (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dān (II), (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria, son of Aššur-uballiṭ (II), (who was) also
... of the king, my lord, I have heard that the king, my lord, is going to the Palace. I have heard that the king, my lord, is going to the Palace. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
The city Arbela, which is in the district of the goddess Ištar.
... 1 wooden ...
The priest of the temple of Aššur, the cook of the temple of Aššur, the brewer of the temple of Aššur, the brewer of the temple of Aššur, the brewer of the temple of Aššur, the brewer of the temple of Aššur, the brewer of the temple of Aššur, the brewer of the temple of Aššur, the brewer of the temple of Aššur, the brewer of the temple of Aššur, the brewer of the temple of Ašš
... the land of Akkad ...
Month Tebet (X), 22nd day, eponym year of Issar-duri.
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Aššur-Aššur-ibni.
Total 88 ...
I conquered the city Tīl-Barsip, which is on the border of the land Elam, (and) I brought within the boundaries of my land (the area stretching) from the passes of Mount Kirruru to the land Gilzānu, which is on the border of the land Elam, (and) the cities Ḫirimu (and) Ḫarutu, which are on the border of the land Elam, (and) the cities Ḫaršunna (and) Ḫaršunna, which
Witness Sin-zeru-ibni. Witness Kiṣir-Aššur.
I have now written to the Palace about the people of the land of Akkad about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why do you say that they are not loyal to the king, your father, and the king, your father, is their lord?"
In the middle of the 'finger' there is a hole. The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 10 in number. The breast-bone is thick...
... I ...
1 woman, 1 daughter, 1 woman, 1 woman,
... I ...
... to his ...
The servants of the king, my lord, ...
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have seen fear and terror at night, or (that) the oracle query has become jumbled and impaired in my mouth...
The upper/lower part is elevated ...
... he
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ahhe-iddina. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
1 grove of poplars ...
... and ...
The priest of the temple of Dagan has said: "The priest of the temple of Dagan ...
The barley ... which the king, my lord, sent to me, ...
Witness Banî. Witness Urda-Nanâ.
... 7 hectares of arable land ...
I had the goddess Nanāya, the goddess of the gods, ... , the goddess of the gods, ... , the goddess of the gods, ... , the goddess of the gods, ... , the goddess of the gods, ... , the goddess of the gods, ... , the goddess of the gods, ... , the goddess of the gods, ... , the goddess of the gods, ... , the goddess of the gods, ... , the goddess of the gods, ... , the goddess of the gods, ... , the goddess of the gods, ... , the
To the king, my lord: your servant, Dadî. Good health to the king, my lord!
... the king, my lord, ...
1 necklace of ...
and ...
Witness ...
... s the king, my lord,
Witness Ša-la-mašê. Witness Nabû-ila'i.
... and his people,
The king, my lord, ...
1 grove of poplars, 1 hectare of arable land, 1 hectare under cultivation therein.
(As for) Bibê, son of Būdu, son of Bunakki, (and) son of Bēlšunu, (who) had cast off the yoke of my lordship, I had mercy on him and (then) I gave him back to him. I sent my messenger to him with my messenger, saying: "You are the king's servants. You are the king's servants. You are the king's servants. You are the king's servants. You are the king's servants. You are the king's servants. You are
Whoever alters the wording of this tablet, or sins against the treaty of the king, my lord, and his sons,
The chief victualler of the House of Succession, the one who provides for the House of Succession, the one who provides for the House of Succession, the one who provides for the House of Succession, the one who provides for the House of Succession, the one who provides for the House of Succession, the one who provides for the House of Succession, the one who provides for the House of Succession, the one who provides for the House of Succession, the one who provides for the House of Succession, the one who provides for the House of Succession, the one who provides for the
... three ...
An estate of 1 hectare of land in the village of Qaqqû, adjoining the field of Bel-ibni.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why do you not write to me?" — I have written to the king, my lord, as soon as I heard that the king, my lord, is in the country.
20 hectares of arable land, 10 hectares under cultivation therein.
... horses
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord!
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "...
... the land ...
... he has given to me
May the god Marduk, the great lord, look with joy upon this work and bless my kingship.
... to my ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why have you not written to me about the men of the prefects of the 100 men of the prefects of the 100 men of the prefects of the 100 men of the prefects of the 100 men of the prefects of the 100 men of the prefects of the 100 men of the prefects of the 100 men of the prefects of the 100 men of the prefects of the
I have now written to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
whom the king, my lord, ...
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
From Rašil the older, servant of the king.
total, of the goddess Gula.
Total 100, the village of Gabbê.
to ...
... Aššur-šarru-ibni ...
total, of the town of ...
... he has given ...
... concerning the king, my lord
From Balasî.
... to the king
... to me
1 grove of ...
The shepherds of the land of Akkad
When the king, my lord, sent me to the Palace, I did not go to the Palace. Now, when the king, my lord, sent me to the Palace, I shall go to the Palace.
... I have now written to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
the servants of ...
... the king ...
... he is saying: "...
The 'well-being' is destroyed ...
The day before yesterday I have been in the presence of Aššur-ila'i.
The king of Elam, the one who had fled to me, is saying: "The king of Elam ...
... 10 oxen
Concerning what Aššur-nadin-šumi wrote to me: "You have not given the horses to Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, that you have given to you" —
When the god Marduk, the great lord, the god Marduk-nādin-šumi, the king of the gods, the king of the universe, the king of the four quarters (of the world), the king of the lands, the king of the four quarters (of the world), the king of the lands, the king of the four quarters (of the world), the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the lands, the king of the
Witness Aššur-ila'i, merchant from the town of Aššur-šallimanni.
... this ...
... the king, my lord, knows that ...
... this ...
of ...
Witness Šamšī-ilu.
To the god Aššur, his lord: Sennacherib, king of Assyria, dedicated (this) for the life of his lord.
and the land of Akkad ...
If the king commands, let them send me the bodyguards who are in my service.
The 'third man' of the 'residences' ...
I have now written to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
... I ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
The king, my lord, knows that ...
A tablet of ... to the king, his father. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
... the land of Akkad ...
... -ilaya, ... -ahhe-iddin, ... -ilaya, in the village of ... -ilaya.
Witness Našuh-šarru-uṣur, cohort commander.
If the sun stands in a stable position: ...
... the magnates of the land of Akkad
Witness Lu-balaṭ. Witness ...
I tore down that small palace in its entirety, (and) I changed the course of the Tebilti River (and) directed its outflow onto the meadow behind the palace.
The 10th of Elul (VI), when the king went to the land Elam, I heard that the Elamites were saying: "The king of Elam is coming to us."
Month Tebet (X), ... th day, eponym year of Nabû-naṣir.
Ubru-Issar, son of Issiya, farmer; 1 woman: 1 daughter, of 4 spans' height.
As for you, may Bel and Nabû, your gods, bless you! May they give you long days of happiness, good health, and a long reign of the king of the universe, your lord!
Witness Aya-qî.
The priest of the temple of Aššur, the priest of the temple of Aššur, the priest of the temple of Aššur, the priest of the temple of Aššur, the priest of the temple of Aššur, the priest of the temple of Aššur, the priest of the temple of Aššur, the priest of the temple of Aššur, the priest of the temple of Aššur, the priest of the temple of Aššur, the priest of the temple of Aššur, the priest of the temple of A
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur, village manager.
The land of the chief cupbearer is well.
As to the ... about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why ...
... the scribe of the household
all the lands ...
... the work of the palace of Harran
10 ...
... the 'residences' of the land of Akkad ...
... s
Ditto by Ištar, the Lady of Arbela!
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, descendant of Būr-Aššur (II), king of the world, king of Assyria
Witness Na'di-ilu, servant of Bel-ušezib.
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The king's word to the Šubraeans old and young: I am well, you can be glad.
If on the 14th day the moon and sun are seen together: reliable speech, the land will become happy ...
Witness Ubru-ahhešu, porter.
1 duck, 10 turtledoves. A tureen of bouillon;
... the work of the god Aššur ...
I have now written to the Palace ...
2 ...
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
As for the one who alters my inscribed object (and) disrespects my words, may the king, my lord, be angry with him and make his name (and) his seed disappear from the land. May he not stand firm before his enemy. May he not keep his hands off the possessions of Esagil and Ezida, and may he not be able to save himself from the hands of his enemy. May he not be able to save himself from the hands of his enemy. May he not be able to save himself from the hands of his enemy. May he not be able to save himself from the
(As for) Nabû-zera-ukin, the son of Ilu-šalimanni, the grandson of Aššur-nadin-šumi, the great grandson of Aššur-nadin-šumi, the great grandson of Aššur-nadin-šumi, the great grandson of Aššur-nadin-šumi, the great grandson of Aššur-nadin-šumi, the great grandson of Aššur-nadin-šumi, the great
Bel-le'i,
Witness ... Witness Barruqu.
... of the land of Akkad ...
Witness Qurdiya.
all ...
As to the ...
In the month of Ab (V), 1st day, eponym year of Aššur-ila'i.
total — Nabû-zeru-ibni, ditto.
who ...
The people of the land of Akkad are saying: "The horses of the king, our lord, are not in our possession."
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
A tablet of the palace scribe to the chief scribe. Good health to my lord!
I have now written to the Palace. Let the king ...
If the sky shouts and the earth quakes: ...
I have not heard any report yet.
Total 23 horses.
The 8th of Elul (VI), the 18th of ...
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the king, my lord. May Bel and Nabû ...
... the men of ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-šimanni. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Ištar bless the king, my lord!
The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 10 in number.
You shall not do anything which is evil and improper to Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, and his sons and grandsons, you shall not seize him and put him to death, you shall not hand him over to his enemy, you shall not set up camp against him, you shall not make common cause with him, you shall not make common cause with him, you shall not make common cause with him, you shall not make common cause with him, you shall not make common cause with him, you shall not make common cause with him, you shall not make common cause with him
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did you not write to me?"
1 duck, 10 turtledoves.
In the month Ayyāru (II), the twenty-third day, eponymy of Aššur-daʾinanni, governor of the city Kalḫu (647). I had the stele bearing my name made and I engraved image(s) of the deities Aššur, Mullissu, Bēl (Marduk), (and) Nabû, the great gods, my lords, on it and I placed (it) in the temple of the god Aššur, my lord.
1 woman ... ;
... in this year
The king, my lord, knows that I have no scribe. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one.
they have given ...
The king, my lord, should ask the ...
Nabonidus, king of Babylon, scribe of the queen.
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... to my ...
... I have sent ...
they have ...
... you ...
... and
As to the people of the land of Akkad about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why do you say: 'They are not ...
I have now written to you, my lord. Let me now write to you, my lord.
I had the palace in Baltil (Aššur), the capital city, built anew and I raised its top as high as a mountain. I made its appearance resplendent and made its appearance shine like daylight. I made its appearance resplendent and made its appearance shine like daylight. I made its appearance resplendent and made its appearance shine like daylight.
Witness Nabû-zeru-ibni, confectioner.
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Witness ... , ... of the town of Bit-Bunakki.
... Nabû-zeru-ibni, chief ...
If the stars of the sky stand in a stable position: waiting for rain and flood will be made.
... he ...
the people of ...
... Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria,
To the king, my lord: your servant Mannu-ki-ahhešu. Good health to the king, my lord!
... 1 ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
Witness ... , 'third man.'
On the 20nd day, when the king, my lord, sent me to the Palace, I was staying overnight in the presence of the king, my lord. I have now written to the king, my lord, on the 21st day. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
Ditto ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto; ditto;
to the king, my lord ...
... the people ...
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Sagab (651).
the rest ...
Seal of Remanni-...
Nabû-zeru-ukin,
... he has given to me
I have now written to my lord, and my lord may do as he finds appropriate.
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
... the towns of the people of the land of Sūḫu
the woman Gagâ ...
Aššur-ila'i, ...
... this ...
The governor of Arbela has given 100 hectares of arable land in the province of Harran to Aššur-ila'i, the scribe of the palace.
May Bel and Nabû, the great gods, who dwell in Ešarra, bless the king of the universe, my lord! Say to the king of the universe, my lord:
... the king, my lord, knows that ...
Disregard that ...
... the land of Akkad ...
Your servant Šarru-emuranni: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
If the moon becomes visible in Sivan (III) on the 30th day: dispersal of Subartu.
Witness Nabû-naṣir, chief confectioner.
The chief victualler of the House of Succession has contracted and bought it for 10 minas of silver.
I have now written to the Palace. Let my lord do as he finds appropriate.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether ...
If the moon and sun are in balance: the king of the land will widen his understanding.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
... the king of the lands, my lord, knows that ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
I have now written to the Palace. Let my lord do as he finds appropriate.
The forts are well.
... Arbela ...
1 woman ...
Witness Šarru-emuranni.
1 prayer bowl ditto;
Moreover, I have heard that the king of Elam has gone to the city of Harran. I have heard that he is staying overnight in Harran.
... to the king of Elam ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, should send the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the man whose name is written in this papyrus,
I have now written to the Palace. Let my lord do as he finds appropriate.
5 hectares, ditto, the land of Hubaba.
(As for) Bibê, the daughter of Banî, the daughter of Banî, the daughter of Banî, the daughter of Banî, the daughter of Banî, the daughter of Banî, the daughter of Banî, the daughter of Banî, the daughter of Banî, the daughter of Banî, the daughter of Banî, the daughter of Banî, the daughter of Banî, the daughter of Banî, the daughter of Banî, the daughter of Banî, the daughter of Banî, the daughter of Banî, the daughter of Banî, the daughter of Banî,
I have now written to the Palace. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
The 10th day, when the king goes to the temple, is when he went to the temple.
The king, my lord, knows that I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one.
On my return march, I defeated Šūzubu (Mušēzib-Marduk), a Chaldean who lives in the marshes, at the city Bittūtu. As for him, terror of doing battle with me fell upon him and (iii 10) he fled alone like a lynx and his (hiding) place could not be found. He fled alone like a lynx and his (hiding) place could not be found. I carried off his brothers, his family, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his brothers, his nephews
... he has now
Month Sivan (III), 1st day, eponym year of Ša-Adad-aninu.
Witness Bel-le'i.
1 woman ... , 1 woman ... , 1 woman ... ,
7 big loaves of bread;
The people of the land of Akkad are saying: "The king, our lord, is a good man.
The king of Elam heard about the conquest of his cities and fear fell upon him. He abandoned the city Madaktu, his royal city, and set out for Assyria. He sent his envoys to me to do obeisance and kiss my feet.
In my first year, in my first regnal year, I mustered my troops (and) took the direct road against Aššur-lēʾi, king of the land Kar-Tukultī-Ninurta (II), king of the land Šalḫalḫal, king of the land Marḫasa, (and) king of the land Ḫindānu. I brought about their defeat (and) carried off their booty, possessions, property, herds, (and) flocks without number. I destroyed, devastated, (and) turned into
... the Babylonians ...
The king, my lord, knows that I have no scribe. I have no one. I have no scribe. I have no scribe.
The king's word to the Šubraeans old and young: I am well.
I have ...
Witness ... , royal bodyguard.
to Babylon ...
... the gods ... the king ... the king ... the king ...
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur, eunuch.
The king, my lord, wrote to me: "... the ... of the king, my lord, ...
The 'finger' is thick. The 'increment' is normal. The 'cap' ...
If Mars stands in Scorpius: there will be reconciliation and peace in the land; the gods will have mercy on the land; the king of the land will widen his understanding; the foundation of the throne of the king of the land will become stable.
The king should ask the scribe of the palace.
On the 2nd day, when the king, my lord, was in the presence of the king, my lord, I was staying overnight in the presence of the king, my lord.
... I have now written to the Palace. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
Witness ... aya ...
For the goddess Nanāya, his lady: Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, king of the four quarters (of the world), (and) king of Assyria, presented (this) for the life of Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria, (and) his own life.
I, Šamaš-ila'i, merchant.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "You have not sent me the horses of the prefects of the Elamites, the Tabaleans, the Cilicians, the Medes, the Manneans, the Lahmu, the Šubaru, the Lihbuqu, the Lahiru, the Qatabu, the Qabu-duru-uṣur, the Qabu-duru-uṣur, the Qatabu-duru-uṣur, the Qatabu-duru-uṣur
If Adad thunders ...
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the king, my lord. I have now written to the king, my lord, about the work of the temple of Aššur. I have now written to the king, my lord, about the work of the temple of Aššur.
I had a stele bearing my name made and I engraved image(s) of the great gods, my lords, on it and I placed before them an image bearing my name. I made an image bearing my name and I placed it before them.
Seal of Nabû-ahhe-iddina, scribe.
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
The land of the chief victualler ...
... Esarhaddon, king of Assyria,
2 ditto, ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why do you not write to me?" —
a 2-seah jar of hinhinu-seeds;
The horses which were in the charge of Aššur-ila'i, which were in the charge of Aššur-šallimanni, are in good standing.
Mannu-ki-...
I have sent ...
... he has given to you ...
... he
Good health to my lord!
To the king, my lord: your servant Naṣiru. Good health to the king, my lord!
... you
1 sisalhu ox, 1 male sheep, 1 male goat, 1 male donkey, 1 male camel.
... the daughter of Anu
The king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why do you say that the king, my lord, has given you orders to go to the presence of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria?"
In the eponymy of Aššur-naṣir, governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, I marched to the land of the Qutu, which is in the mountains. I conquered the land of the Qutu, which is in the mountains. I brought within the boundaries of my land (the territory stretching) from the passes of Mount Habruru to Mount Saue, the land of the Qutu, which is in the mountains. I placed a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over them.
Mannu-ki-... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ...
I am now writing to you: be it that you write to me, or that you write to me what you hear.
I tore down that small palace in its entirety, (and) I changed the course of the Tebilti River (and) directed its outflow onto the meadow behind the city.
... the king, my lord,
Witness Šulmu-beli.
Witness Qurdi-Issar, chief cook of the palace.
A tablet of NN to the king, his lord: Good health to the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
The 'finger' is thick.
Month of Sivan (III), 1st day.
... you ...
Now, as to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "You have not written to me about the news of the king of Elam, so I have not heard it" — I have heard that he is in the presence of the king, my lord.
Witness Arbailayu, ...
22 ditto of sesame; 10 of kudimmu salt;
Witness ... -Nabû.
Now then I am writing to the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
The lands rejoice, the cities are happy. The king, my lord, can be glad.
... of the land of Akkad, in the district of the city of Arbela.
1 seah 1 'litre' spiced bread; 1 seah 1 'litre' spiced bread.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
... the horses
... Enlil
(As for) the one who alters an inscribed object bearing my name, (or) sins against the treaty of the great gods, may Aššur, king of the gods, the one who decrees the fates, the one who decrees the destinies, the one who decrees the fates of the great gods, the one who decrees the fates of the great gods, the one who decrees the fates of the great gods, the one who decrees the fates of the great gods, the one who decrees the fates of the great gods, the one who
... my ...
... the palace manager
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments ...
... to Nabû
The king, my lord, knows that I have no scribe.
The priest of the temple of Nabû, the one who reveres the king, the one who reveres the king, the one who reveres the king, the one who reveres the king, the one who reveres the king, the one who reveres the king, the one who reveres the king, the one who reveres the king, the one who reveres the king, the one who reveres the king, the one who reveres the king, the one who reveres the king, the one who reveres the king, the one who reveres the king, the one who reveres the
An estate of 1 hectare ...
... he has ...
... the king, my lord, knows that ...
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled and impaired in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
Bel and Nabû ...
If the red glow of Mars ...
An estate of 1 hectare of land, 1 threshing-floor,
May the king, my lord, be in good spirits! May Aššur and Ištar bless the king, my lord!
Witness Manu-ki-šarru, royal bodyguard.
I have now written to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
Nabû-ahhe-iddina,
... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ...
If the moon in Elul (VI) becomes visible on the 30rd day: dispersal of Subartu.
... 1 duck, 10 turtledoves ...
... in the presence of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your servant, Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your servant, Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your servant, Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your servant, Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarh
Witness Milqî.
The prefects of the land of Akkad have come to me in Kar-Tukulti-Ninurta. The king, my lord, can be glad.
10 hectares of arable land ...
I have now written to the king, my lord.
The king, my lord, knows that I have no one. I have no one. I have no one. I have no one.
Witness Aššur-nadin-šumi, chariot driver of the crown prince.
... and
Witness Sin-ereš, ...
Fingernail of Našuh-milki, owner of the house being sold.
they have ...
If Mars stands in Scorpius: the king of Akkad will be shut up in his palace.
The palace of Tiglath-pileser, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rabi (II), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dān (II) (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rabi (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rabi (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assy
...
... he has given to me
... Nabonidus ...
Total, in the charge of the 'Lady of Cults,' in the district of the town of Harran.
May the god Nabû, the august lord, look with joy upon this work and bless the king, my lord! May he bless the king, my lord!
Witness Nabû-eriba, cohort commander.
... the land ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ...
1 woman, 1 daughter, 1 maid, 1 suckling son, 1 woman, 1 maid, 1 woman, 1 maid, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1
The 'station' is curled. There is a hole in the left side of the 'finger' ...
they have given ...
... 20 ...
... Babylon ...
of Nabû-belu-ka''in ...
The silver, gold, (and) precious stones which the prefects of the Inner City brought to me, I have given to the king, my lord. I have given 10 minas of silver to the prefects of the Inner City.
Aššur-nādin-šumi, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-rabi (I), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-uballiṭ (I), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Erība-Marduk (I), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-nādin-šumi (I), vice-regent of Aššur,
... 20 hectares of arable land in the village of ...
From Zakir.
Shalmaneser, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also strong king, king of the universe, and king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II), (who was) also strong king, king of the universe, and king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dān (II), (who was
and ...
I have now written to the king, my lord, about what I wrote to the king, my lord, yesterday. May Aššur, Bel and Nabû bless the king, my lord! May Aššur, Bel and Nabû give you long days of happiness and physical well-being to the king, my lord!
... Aššur-ila'i
Witness Ahu-iddina.
The money is paid completely. That field is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
If the moon at its appearance stands in a stable position: waiting for rain.
Witness Qaši-Aššur, son of Na...
Bel-naṣir, ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... ,
... 16 hectares of arable land
Month Tebet (X), 20th day, eponym year of Aššur-da''inanni.
On the 8th day, when the king, my lord, was in the presence of the king, my lord, I wrote to the king, my lord, as follows:
adjoining ...
... Babylon ...
...
Witness Ubru-Nanaya.
The gods of Arbela.
On my return march, I placed Aššur-nādin-šumi, my first-born son, on his lordly throne and entrusted him with the wide land of Sumer and Akkad. I made him sit on his royal throne and entrusted him with the wide land of Sumer and Akkad.
4 ...
... the gods Aššur, Bēl (Marduk), ...
... he
adjoining the field of Nabû-naṣir,
(As for) Aššur-nādin-aššur, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-rabi (I), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Enlil-nādin-aššur (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur:
To the king, my lord: your servant Nashir-Bel. Good health to the king, my lord!
If Adad thunders in Shebat (XI), on the 14th day: there will be an eclipse, and the south wind will blow.
They have said: "We shall go and ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šarru-uṣur. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
with the town of ...
If Venus stands in the halo of the moon: there will be an eclipse of Subartu.
When the god Marduk, my lord, sent me to the land of the Arameans, I had the land of the Arameans, the land of the Arameans, the land of the Arameans, the land of the Arameans, the land of the Arameans, the land of the Arameans, the land of the Arameans, the land of the Arameans, the land of the Arameans, the land of the Arameans, the land of the Arameans, the land of the Arameans, the land of the Arameans, the
1 ditto, 1 ditto,
I conquered the city Bīt-Kilamzaḫ, their fortified city, and I brought out of it people, horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty. I destroyed, devastated, (and) turned into ruins their small(er) settlements, which were without number. I burned with fire the rest of them, and reduced (them) to ashes.
I have now written to you: ...
... to me ...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the 10th day of this month Iyyar (II), of this year, the term stipulated for the performance of (this) extispicy,
of 1 ...
2, 2,
If Adad thunders in Shebat (XI): the harvest of the land will prosper.
I placed in his hands the just scepter that widens the land and the crown that enlarges the land. I placed in his hands the just scepter that widens the land and the crown that enlarges the land. I placed in his hands the just scepter that widens the land and the crown that enlarges the land.
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
... he is saying: "...
The king of the land Elam heard about the conquest of his cities and fear fell upon him. He abandoned his royal city Madaktu, his treasury, and his palace without number and he set out for the land Ḫaydala, which is in the mountains. He crossed the Idide River, which is in the mountains, and established that river as his defensive position. He made the people of his land take up hoe and basket and they made bricks. He made bricks in brickmolds of ivory, boxwood, ebony, (and) musukkannu-
... the magnates
Aššur-Aššur, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (II), (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur:
Your servant Nabû-nadin-šumi: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: I am well, you can be glad. Say to the king, my lord: I am well, you can be glad.
Witness Aya.
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, descendant of Būr-Aššur (II), (who was) also king of the world and
Witness Nabû-naṣir.
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why do you not write to me?" —
I have now written to the Palace in the hands of my messenger.
In the top of the 'finger' there is a hole. The 'finger' is thick.
Total, 4 men, owners of the field being sold.
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-Aššur-ibni. Good health to the king, my lord!
To the goddess Nanāya, his lady: Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, ...
If Adad thunders in Tebet (X), on the 14th day: there will be an eclipse ...
Month Iyyar (II), 22nd day, eponym year of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, governor of Arbela.
The king, my lord, knows that I have no servants in my possession. I have no one in my possession. I have no one in my possession. I have no one in my possession. I have no one in my possession. I have no one in my possession. I have no one in my possession. I have no one in my possession.
Total, 5 persons, owners of the field being sold.
I have now written to the Palace. Let my lord do as he finds appropriate. I have now written to the Palace, my lord, about what I have seen. I have now written to the Palace, my lord, about what I have seen.
I have now written to you, and you should do whatever you can do.
In the eponymy of Nabû-nādin-šumi, governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, I marched to the land of the Qutu, which is behind Mount Bikni.
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, descendant of Būr-Aššur (II), (who was) also king of the world and
10 hectares of arable land ... , ... of ...
I have now written to you: be attentive! I have now written to you, and you should be attentive! May Aššur and Mullissu bless you!
If the moon reaches the sun and follows it closely: there will be truth in the land, and the son will speak the truth with his father. — On the 14th day one god is seen with the other.
... , Arbela.
On my return march, I placed Aššur-nādin-šumi, my first-born son on his lordly throne and entrusted him with the wide land of Sumer and Akkad.
... to the king ...
... who ...
The 'path' is curled. The 'well-being' is destroyed ...
11 shekels of silver ...
The sons of the king, my lord, are well.
total ... 1 house.
1 ditto ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, ditto, dit
If the moon is surrounded by a halo and Mars stands in it: the king of Akkad will be shut up in his palace.
1 cow of silver;
In the month of Aya-ila'i, the 3rd day, when ...
... the Elamites
... I had a stele bearing my name made and I engraved image(s) of the deities Aššur, Bēl (Marduk), (and) Nabû on it and I placed (it) in the temple of the god Aššur, my lord, for future generations to see. I made (it) shine like daylight and made (it) resplendent. I made (it) shine like daylight and made (it) resplendent.
I surrounded (and) conquered the city Bīt-Kilamzaḫ, their fortified city. I brought out of it people, horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty. I destroyed, devastated, (and) turned into ruins their small(er) settlements, which were without number. I burned with fire the rest of them, (and) reduced (them) to ashes. I poured out awe-inspiring brilliance upon their ally, the land Elam.
I had a stele bearing my name made and I engraved image(s) of the great gods, my lords, on it and I placed before them an image bearing my name. I made an image bearing my name and I placed it before them. I made an image bearing my name and I placed it before them.
If the moon becomes visible in Sivan (III) on the 30rd day: dispersal of Subartu, the Westland.
2 minas of Nabû-eriba, scribe.
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
son of Aya-ramu, ditto.
Instead of their seals they impressed their fingernails.
Good health to the king, my lord!
May the great gods of heaven and earth, the gods of earth, the gods of earth, the gods of earth, the gods of earth, the gods of earth, the gods of earth, the gods of earth, the gods of earth, the gods of earth, the gods of earth, the gods of earth, the gods of earth, the gods of earth, the gods of earth, the gods of earth, the gods of earth, the gods of earth, the gods of earth, the gods of earth, the gods of earth, the gods of earth, the gods of earth, the gods of earth, the gods of earth
(As for) the one who alters an inscription bearing my name, may Aššur, my lord, overthrow his kingship, curse him angrily, and make his name (and) his seed disappear from the land.
in the month of Adar (XII), ...
1 ditto of sesame; 1 ditto of kernels.
100 ditto, palace manager.
... Arbela ...
The priest of the temple of Dagan has contracted and bought it for 10 minas of silver.
... Month Tebet (X), 22nd day ...
On the 17th day, when the king ...
... he has given
Nabonidus, king of Assyria, has contracted and bought them for one mina of silver.
... the king, my lord, ...
in the hands of the scribe of the king, my lord.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Now then I am writing to the Palace. Let the king do as he finds appropriate.
... sheep
The king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why do you ... the king's servants? ...
... you
I have now written to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate. I have now written to the Palace, my lord, about the horses which I sent to the Palace, my lord.
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... Arbela ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments ...
Now ...
... I have now written to the Palace. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
To the king, my lord: your servant Issar-duri. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
6 towns ...
Witness Ilu-...
Aššur-zeru-ibni, ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
4 homers of barley ...
If the king, my lord, so orders, I will go and speak with them.
8 big loaves of bread ...
... he has given to you
This is from the series.
As to the news of the son of Yakin, he is in Babylon. He is saying: "The son of Yakin is in Babylon. He is saying: 'The son of Yakin is in Babylon. The son of Yakin is in Babylon.'"
I have now written to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate. I have now written to the king, my lord, what I have seen.
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: reliable speech, the land will become happy.
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of ... , governor of ...
... I ...
... I have now written to you
... of wine ...
... of the magnates of the land Elam.
in my mouth ...
Witness Qa...
... the bodyguard ...
If on the 14th day the moon and sun are seen together: reliable speech, the land will become happy; the gods will remember Akkad favorably; joy among the troops; the king will become happy; the cattle of Akkad will lie in the steppe undisturbed. — On the 14th day one god is seen with the other.
... their ...
they have given to me ...
... I have sent them to you
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, (and) king of the land of Sumer and Akkad —
Witness Mannu-ki-Arbail. Witness Ubru-Nabû.
If Adad thunders in the middle of the sky: ...
Nabonidus, king of Babylon, son of Esarhaddon, king of Babylon, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also king of Babylon.
An estate of Barbarani, chief tailor, son of Ilu-bani, chief tailor, son of Ilu-bani, chief tailor, son of Ilu-bani, chief tailor, son of Ilu-bani, chief tailor, son of Ilu-bani, chief tailor, son of Ilu-bani, chief tailor, son of Ilu-bani, chief tailor, son of Ilu-bani, chief tailor, son of Ilu-bani, chief tailor, son of Ilu-bani, chief
I have now written to you, and you have not heard a word from me. I have now written to you, and you have not heard a word from me. I have now written to you, and you have not heard a word from me. I have now written to you, and you have not heard a word from me. I have now written to you, and you have not heard a word from me. I have now written to you, and you have not heard a word from me. I have now written to you, and you have not heard a word from me.
Witness Šimanni.
Bel-iddina,
4 sheep ...
... s, 1 male sheep, 1 female sheep.
The priest of the temple of Aššur, the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one
I have now written to the Palace. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
In the city Kalḫu, I received from the people of the land Bīt-Kapsi (Bīt-Kapsi) the tribute of the land Bīt-Sangi (Bīt-Šangi), the land Bīt-Urzakki (Bīt-Urzakki), the land Bīt-Bunakki (Bīt-Bunakki), the land Bīt-Bunakki (Bīt-Bunakki), the land Bīt-Bunakki (Bīt-
Witness ... , ... , cupbearer.
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, who reveres him,
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments ...
Witness Aššur-Aššur-ibni, ditto.
... wine ...
I had a stele bearing my name made and I engraved image(s) of the great gods, my lords, on it and I placed before them an image bearing my name. I made an image bearing my name and I placed it before Aššur, my lord. I made an image bearing my name and I placed it before Aššur, my lord.
The 28th day.
30 ... before ...
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhešu, porter.
... their ... s in the land of Akkad.
On my return march, I defeated Šūzubu (Mušēzib-Marduk), a Chaldean who lives in the marshes, at the city Bittūtu. As for him, terror of doing battle with me fell upon him and (iii 10) he fled alone like a lynx and his (hiding) place could not be found.
Witness Tabalayu.
5 minas of silver, capital, belonging to Aššur-šallimanni, at the disposal of Nabû-zeru-uṣur, chief tailor.
Total, in the charge of ... -ila'i.
Mannu-ki-Aššur, reporter.
6 bags of sesame; 1 seah of kernels.
The land of the king is well; the forts are well. The king, my lord, can be glad.
A tablet of Kiṣir-Aššur to the king, his lord:
... they are ...
Total, of the estate of Sin-nadin-ahhešu.
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Whoever alters the wording of this tablet, or sins against the treaty of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria,
On my third campaign, I marched against Baʾalu, the king of the land Tyre who resides in the middle of the sea. Because he did not honor my treaty, I imposed upon him the heavy punishment of ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ...
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, the one who built (and) completed Egallammes, the one who constructed the temple of the goddess Ištar, the one who built the temple of the goddess Ningal, the one who built the temple of the goddess Nanāya, the one who built the temple of the goddess Nanāya, the one who built the temple of the goddess Nan
Total, in the charge of Aššur-belu-uṣur ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-šar-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord!
Ashur-ila'i,
... the town of ...
... Arbela
... concerning ...
An estate of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, chief cook of the New Palace.
To the god Aššur, his lord: Shalmaneser, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (II), (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-dān (II),
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why do you say: 'The king, my lord, knows that I have no news of the king, my lord, yet'?
... you ...
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did you not write to me?" I have now written to the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
In the month Iyyar (II), 1st day, eponym year of Dadî.
Palace of Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, descendant of Būr-Aššur (II), king of the world, king of Assyria
1 woman, 1 ...
... they have given to me
I have given 100 horses to the prefects of the prefects of ... , and they have brought them to me.
with ...
Month Tebet (X), 20th day, eponym year of Sennacherib.
I have written to the king, my lord, about what I heard. I have now written to the king, my lord, about what I heard. I have now written to the king, my lord, about what I heard.
... the goddess Ištar, ... the goddess Nanāya, ... the goddess Nanāya, ... the goddess Nanāya, ... the goddess Nanāya, ... the goddess Nanāya, ... the goddess Nanāya, ... the goddess Nanāya, ... the goddess Nanāya, ... the goddess Nanāya, ... the goddess Nanāya, ... the goddess Nanāya, ... the goddess Nanāya, ... the goddess Nanāya, ... the god
The priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur, the priest of Aššur,
The forts of the king, my lord, are well. The king, my lord, can be glad.
at the disposal of Ubru-Nabû, ...
Remanni-Illil, son of Mannu-ki-ahhešu, has contracted and bought from Mannu-ki-ahhešu for one mina of silver.
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled and impaired in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
Witness Bel-na'id.
1 sisalhu ox, 1 male sheep, 1 male goat, 1 male donkey, 1 male camel, 1 male camel, 1 male camel, 1 male camel, 1 male camel, 1 male camel, 1 male camel, 1 male camel, 1 male camel, 1 male camel, 1 male camel, 1 male camel, 1 male camel, 1 male camel, 1 male camel, 1 male camel, 1 male camel,
The king, my lord, should know (this).
2 ...
... day ...
... the god Aššur, my lord, knows that I have no rival among the kings, my foes are submissive. I have no rival among the princes, my foes are submissive. I have no rival among the kings, my foes are submissive. I have no rival among the princes, my foes are submissive.
Aššur-ila'i, the ... of the king, my lord, ... , has said: "The king, my lord, knows that ... "
If Adad thunders in Shebat (XI), day 1: there will be an earthquake.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether ... Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, ... , should send Nabû-šarru-uṣur, chief eunuch, to the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity,
The palace of Aššur-bēl-kala, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I), king of Assyria, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also king of Assyria:
Now ...
of the palace of ...
... I ... to the land of Akkad ... I ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
as ...
The town of Barbarani, the scribe of the queen mother, is well. The barley is in good condition. The barley is in good condition.
1 grove of poplars; 1 hectare of arable land; 1 hectare under cultivation therein. 1 woman; 1 daughter of 4 spans' height.
... I have not heard ...
In the month of Tebet (X), the day was cloudy, it rained heavily. The day was cloudy, it rained heavily. The day was cloudy, it rained heavily. The day was cloudy, it rained heavily.
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
... he has given 10 minas of silver
The 2nd of Elul (VI), the 4th of Tebet (X), the 10th of Sivan (III), the 1st of Marchesvan (VIII), the 10th of Shebat (XI).
Witness Mušallim-Nabû. Witness Ubru-Nabû.
... Witness Aya-nuri.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why do you say: 'The king, my lord, knows that I have no work in the service of the king, my lord'?"
to ...
... they have given to me ...
... I have given ... to you.
Witness Mušezib-ilu, scribe of the queen.
and they have given to me.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, should send Nabû-šarru-uṣur, chief eunuch, to the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity,
(As for) the land of the Yasubigallians, which is on the border of Mannea, I conquered (it) in its entirety. I brought within the boundaries of Assyria (the land of the Yasubigallians), which is on the border of Mannea.
... Arbela ...
... the king, my lord, knows that ...
I have now written to the Palace. Let ... do ...
... 1 1/2 minas, Qurdi-Aššur, ...
Mannu-ki-ahhešu, son of Kiṣir-Aššur, servant of the chief cupbearer.
... , 1 woman, 1 daughter, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1 woman, 1
May the gods of the king, my lord, bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
Witness Ubru-ahhešu, servant of the vizier.
... to them
shall place 10 minas of silver (and) one mina of gold in the lap of Ištar of Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
A tablet of Aššur-iddin to the chief cupbearer, his brother. Good health to my brother!
... Witness Šamaš-šarru-uṣur.
... to the lord of lords
If the moon becomes visible in Sivan (III) on the 1st day: reliable speech, the land will become happy.
Witness Nabû-šumu-iškun.
... to ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
... he has given 8 minas of silver to me.
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, chariot driver of the crown prince.
... ditto ditto, red, of the port;
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
The money is paid completely. That ... is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
the woman ...
... As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
... I have now written to the Palace.
... of Elam ...
The city of the king, my lord, is well.
... Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, has commanded.
The prefect of the land of Ruṣapu, the one who reveres the goddess Ištar, the one who reveres the king, the one who reveres the king, the one who reveres the king, the one who reveres the king, the one who reveres the king, the one who reveres the king, the one who reveres the king, the one who reveres the king, the one who reveres the king, the one who reveres the king, the one who reveres the king, the one who reveres the king, the one who reveres the king,
The king of the land Elam heard about the conquest of his land and fear fell upon him. He abandoned the city Madaktu, his royal city, and set out for the city Ḫaydala, which is in the mountains. He crossed the Idide River, which is in the mountains, and established that river as his defensive position. He made the people of his land take up hoe and basket and they made bricks. He made bricks in brickmolds of ivory, boxwood, ebony, (and) musukkannu-wood and he made (them
1 goose, 1 duck, 10 turtledoves.
I carried off people, horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, then I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, fortresses of Assyria, and the district of the land of the Yasubigallians, and I added (this area) to the territory of Assyria. I placed (it) under the authority a eunuch of mine, the governor of the city
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šarru-uṣur. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
... in the presence of the king, my lord
... I have heard that ...
(As for) the one who alters an inscription bearing my name, may Aššur, king of the gods, overthrow his kingship, curse him angrily, and make his name (and) his seed disappear from the land.
10 hectares, ... ,
horses ...
I have ...
50 (items): copper basins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbasins, copper washbas
... in the presence of the king, my lord, ...
... 4 ... s
a cup of fig-beer;
... in the land of Akkad ...
... he
3 ditto — Nabû-zeru-ukin,
Mars stood in Scorpius; it is a star of the Westland. It is a star of the Westland; it is a star of the Westland. It is a star of the Westland. It is a star of the Westland. It is a star of the Westland.
we shall go ...
9 hectares, ditto, the house of the priest of the temple.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, should send the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the man whose name is written in this papyrus,
In the eponymy of Aššur-iddin, governor of the city Kalḫu (647), ...
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, who reveres him, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, who reveres him, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, who reveres him, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, who reveres him, who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods
Assurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria, overseer; son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, likewise overseer.
... before ...
... 5 ...
I have now written to the Palace. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
... and ...
The king, my lord, knows that I have no scribe. I have no one. I have no scribe.
May the goddess Nanāya, the lady of the gods, look with joy upon this work and bless my lord.
... the town of Bit-Dakkuri
40 sheep,
(As for) Dunānu (and) Aplāya, sons of Bēlšunu (Bēlšunu), (my) lord, they are the sons of the king, my lord. They are the sons of the king, my lord. They are the sons of the king, my lord. They are the sons of the king, my lord. They are the sons of the king, my lord. They are the sons of the king, my lord. They are the sons of the king, my lord. They are the sons of the king, my lord. They are the sons
you ...
4 hectares of arable land in the environs of Harran, in the charge of Aššur-belu-taqqin.
adjoining the field of ...
In the month of Iyyar (II), the 10th day, when the king, my lord, sent me to the Palace, I have been staying overnight in my house.
... in Assyria ...
(As for) the one who alters my inscribed object (and) disrespects my words, may the deities Aššur, Mullissu, Bēl (Marduk), (and) Nabû not grant him a life of long days of happiness, good health, (and) joy, (and) may they not grant him a just scepter, a royal crown, (and) a royal crown with a long life, (and) may they not make his reign secure for future days. May they overthrow his kingship, curse him angrily, and make his
10 minas of silver, capital, belonging to Nergal-šarrani, at the disposal of Remanni-ilu.
He shall return the money tenfold to its owners.
May Aššur, king of the gods, Aššur, king of the gods, Aššur, king of the gods, Aššur, king of the gods, Aššur, king of the gods, Aššur, king of the gods, Aššur, king of the gods, Aššur, king of the gods, Aššur, king of the gods, Aššur, king of the gods, Aššur, king of the gods, Aššur, king of the gods, Aššur, king of
If a snake is seen in the temple of Ištar: there will be reconciliation and peace in the land.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nashir-Bel. Good health to the king, my lord!
... 1 duck, 10 turtledoves.
Nabonidus, king of Babylon,
5 ditto of sesame; 10 ditto of ...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, should send the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the man whose name is written in this papyrus,
... of the palace of the crown prince.
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, the one who built Egalzagdinutukua (“The Palace Without a Rival”), the one who built Eanna (“The Palace Without a Rival”), the one who built Eanna (“The Palace Without a Rival”), the one who built Eanna ("The Palace Without a Rival”), the one who built Eanna ("The Palace Without a Rival”), the
I surrounded (and) conquered the city Bīt-Kilamzaḫ, their fortified city. I brought out of it people, horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty. I destroyed, devastated, (and) turned into ruins their small(er) settlements, which were without number. I burned with fire the rest of them, (and) reduced (them) to ashes.
1 1/2 minas ...
Ubru-Issar, farmer; 1 woman: 1 daughter of 4 spans' height. 1 woman of 3 spans' height.
The priest of the temple of Nineveh, the one who reveres the king, is saying: "The king should ask me!"
I built palatial halls of gold, silver, (and) bronze, (and) I named them “Palatial Halls Without a Rival.” I named them “Palatial Halls Without a Rival.” I named them “Palatial Halls Without a Rival.” I named them “Palatial Halls Without a Rival.” I named them “Palatial Halls Without a Rival.” I named them “Palatial Halls Without a Rival.” I named them “Palatial Halls Without a Rival.” I named them “Palatial Halls Without
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did you not write to me?"
4 ditto of sesame;
If Adad thunders in Shebat (XI), on the 10th day: the harvest of the land will prosper.
Yamanayu, eponym year of Mannu-ki-šarru-uṣur.
... this ...
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "You have not written to me" —
... I
to ...
The king, my lord, ...
To the goddess Nanāya, his mistress, has Aššur-šallimanni, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Ashurbanipal (II), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria, dedicated (this) for the life of Ashurbanipal (II), king of the universe, and king of Assyria, his own life, the well-being of his seed, his land, his people,
...
From Ašaredu.
Witness Lu-balaṭ.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did you not write to me?"
I have now written to the Palace. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
... you ...
In the future, may one of the kings, my descendants, whom the god Aššur and the goddess Ištar, nominate for ruling over the land and people, renovate its dilapidated section(s) when that House of Succession becomes old and dilapidated.
... the Babylonian ...
Witness Adad-zeru-ibni.
... I have heard that
... of the people ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
(As for) the white limestone that was discovered in the territory of the city Balāṭāya, I had (it) made into bull colossi and sphinxes, and I made their appearance(s)(s) resplendent. I made their appearance(s)(s) resplendent (and) made (them) shine like daylight. I made their appearance(s)(s) resplendent (and) made (them) shine like daylight.
... Ilu-šal...
... 1 sheep, 1 bowl (of wine):
In the eponymy of Aššur-iddin, governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari,
... their ...
In the eponymy of Aššur-da''inanni, governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, ...
Total, in the charge of Sin-ahhe-iddina, prefect of the Assyrian Enlil.
... and his people,
went ...
The son of Aššur-bēl-kala, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-rabi (I), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-dān (I), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-rabi (I), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-dān (I), vice-regent of Aššur, son of A
... concerning ...
... I have sent ...
In the month of Adad-remanni.
... of cornland ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why do you say: 'The king of Elam is a criminal'?"
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, should send the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the man whose name is written in this papyrus,
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ahhe-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I had the people of the lands Bīt-Bunakki (Bīt-Bunakki), Bīt-Šilāni (Bīt-Šilāni), Bīt-Šilāni (Bīt-Šilāni), Bīt-Šilāni (Bīt-Šilāni), Bīt-Šilāni (Bīt-Šilāni), Bīt-Šilāni (Bīt-Šilāni), Bīt-Šilāni (Bīt-
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ahhe-iddina. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
