I made the people of the land Ḫatti, who live in the mountains, bow down at my yoke. I placed a representative (of mine) over them and considered them as people of my land. I imposed upon them corvée (and) labor (duty) just like that of Assyria.
On the night of ... , in the morning watch, the moon and sun were seen together. This is good for the king my lord.
15 shekels of silver, capital, belonging to Habasti, at the disposal of ...
5 bags of (mixed) kernels, 5 bags of (mixed) kernels from the town of Tillê, 5 bags of (mixed) kernels from the town of Tillê, 5 bags of (mixed) kernels from the town of Tillê, 5 bags of (mixed) kernels from the town of Tillê, 5 bags of (mixed) kernels from the town of Tillê, 5 bags of (mixed) kernels from the town of Tillê, 5
... the 'path' ...
what he/they ...
... he will speak.
... Now then ...
in all, the house of the ...
The gods of the king, my lord, know that the gods of the king, my lord, have been angry with me. May the gods of the king, my lord, forgive me!
Witness Barruqu, chariot driver.
May the goddess Ištar, supreme lady, look upon this work with pleasure and may a good word for me be set upon her lips! May she make my weapons prevail over all (my) enemies! May she make all the rulers bow down at my feet!
2 ...
Witness Urdu-Nabû, scribe.
... of the land of Akkad, the temples, the palaces, the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... ,
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
To the king, my lord: your servant PN. Good health to the king, my lord!
... 1 litre for ... ;
1, the 'eye-stones' of the 'increment';
May the goddess Ištar, supreme lady, look upon this work with pleasure and may a good word for me be set upon her lips! May she make my weapons prevail over all (my) enemies!
4 Kushite horses trained to the yoke in the palace herald's presence;
40 hectares of land in the town of Zizî, adjoining the field of the town of Zizî, the field of the town of Zizî, and the field of the town of Zizî —
Month Iyyar (II), 22nd day, eponym year of Bel-dan, governor of the city Tušḫa (648).
... 1 ...
Ahu-lamur ...
... of the bedspread ...
... -ilu, Tattî, 1 son of his, 1 woman, 1 daughter, weaned: a total of 4 people.
The palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of Assyria: (slab) belonging to the house of boxwood.
Ditto by Madanu and Ningal!
... of the temple of the goddess Ištar, which Arik-dīn-ili had built, had buckled and ...
Taharqa heard about the advance of my expeditionary force and that I had set foot on Egyptian territory, and (then) he abandoned the city Memphis and, in order to save his (own) life, fled inside the city Thebes. The kings, governors, (and) officials whom I had stationed in Egypt came to meet me and kissed my feet. I imposed upon Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), king of Karduniaš (Babylonia), a heavy punishment in order to show the praise of (the
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether ... -ereš or his sons, seeks a lawsuit or litigation against ... ,
Witness Mannu-ki-Libbali, scribe.
... the goddess Ištar, the lady of battle and war, who loves me, ... I mustered the workmen of the gods Šamaš and Marduk and they made (it) with baked bricks from a (ritually) pure kiln. I raised its superstructure 190 courses of brick high. I built (and) completed (it) from its foundation(s) to its crenellations. I made (it) an object of wonder for all of the people.
... and the top of the 'station' are present. The 'paths' are 2, the 'strength' is absent.
If Jupiter stands in Sagittarius: the king of Akkad will die.
... Yari-Aššur
... adjoining the road that leads to
10 minas of silver, capital belonging to Aššur-matu-taqqin, at the disposal of Remanni-Adad.
Witness Sagî, porter.
... of the land Ḫatti ... I conquered ... I carried off ... I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire ... I captured ... I carried off ... I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire ... I captured ... I carried off ... I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire ... I captured ... I carried off ... I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire ... I captured ... I carried off ... I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire ...
Aššur has said: "...
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the king, my lord. I have no house, no field, no orchard, no well, no spring, no ... , no servant, no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... ,
horses ...
I, Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, the one who reveres you, am herewith sending to you my messenger, the chief eunuch, with a message for you. Whatever news there is, he will tell to the king, my lord.
The palace herald, my lord, has given 300 sheep to the ... , and the ... has given 100 sheep to the ... , but the ... has not given any sheep to the ...
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Witness Šarru-emuranni.
(As for) Umba-LAGABua, the son of Teumman — a (former) king of the land Elam — who had come to the aid of Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, his brother, and had come to my aid, I cut off his head.
The money is paid completely.
The palace herald and the chief eunuch are in the presence of Aššur-ila'i. The king, my lord, should ask them.
The servants of Sin-na'di-ahhe have been sold for money to the Babylonians. They are plotting to kill me, and I have no one. I have written to the king, my lord, only for the sake of my life.
... I made ... bow down at my feet. I ... the god Aššur, my lord, ... I mustered ... I made ... bow down at my feet. I ... the god Aššur, my lord, ... I mustered ... I made ... bow down at my feet. I ... the god Aššur, my lord, ... I mustered ...
If a planet stands in the north: the king of Akkad will die.
Bel-ahu-uṣur, ... of the mayor of Nineveh;
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether these men or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or his prefect or his governor or his mayor or his city-lord or his ... , seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Bel-emuranni and his sons,
The king, my lord, should ask Mannu-ki-Arbail about the work assignment of Mannu-ki-Arbail and the work assignment of his son.
Month Tebet (X), 15th day, eponym year of Dadî.
the 'hand' of god ...
... and the top ...
2 bags of chick-peas; 2 bags of sesame;
This is its interpretation.
... 1 ...
total 4,000.
The gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, and Nergal, the great gods, my lords,
... and the district of the Lower Zab
Now, if it is agreeable to the king, my lord, let them ... and ... the ... s.
Kanunayu, gardener; ... ; a total of 4 people.
total, the palace personnel of the mother of the king.
... servant of NN
If an eclipse begins in the north and the north wind blows: the land will become happy.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Aplaya or his sons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Remanni-Adad and his sons,
Adad-nārārī, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Arik-dīn-ili, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Enlil-nārārī (who was) also vice-regent of the god Aššur:
They (= the Ionians) did not take anything (and) when they saw my  troops they embarked their boats and fled into the midst of the sea. I  pursued them to the sea and defeated them. They ... ed their boats and  ... ed their ...
... the 'hand' of god ...
... , 4 persons;
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Concerning the ...
Witness Nabû-...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Ṣalaya or his sons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Ṣalaya, his sons and his grandsons,
adjoining the side road of ... ,
1 hectare of field in the town of the Hagaranu in the district of the city of the Hagaranu;
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
The day that he saw ...
... the king, my lord ...
If on the 15th day the moon and sun are seen together: a strong enemy will raise his weapons against the land; the enemy will tear down my city gate.
Witness Se'-manani.
The king, my lord, should ask the palace herald and the chief eunuch whether there is any barley (here) or not.
I, Ashurbanipal, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, the one who built the temple of the god Aššur, the one who (re)confirmed the regular offerings for the great gods, the one who (re)established the rites of the great gods, the one who (re)confirmed the offerings for the great gods, the one who (re)confirmed the regular offerings for the great gods, the one who (re)confirmed the offer
the eclipse ...
Witness Mar-šarri-ila'i, ...
in the charge of the 'third man' ...
Just as you have done, may your sons and your daughters do likewise.
From Nergal-eṭir, son of Yakin, descendant of Mannu-ki-Arbail.
at their disposal.
Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, ... , the one who reveres the great gods, ... , the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of the great gods, ... , the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of the great gods, ... , the one who reveres the great gods, ... , the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of the great gods, ... , the one who reveres the great gods, ... , the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of the great gods, ... , the one who reveres the great gods,
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Aššur-duru-uṣur.
Ditto by Ilu-taklak!
and ...
they are making ...
... the 'path' is present...
... the singer whom you ...
Now, if the king, my lord, commands, ...
I have sent three letters to the Palace. I have not seen an answer to my letter, nor have I heard anything about the palace. I have become worried and depressed. I do not know whether or not whether there is anything to be worried about.
... Aššur-šumu-ukin
... the messenger of the king of Elam ... who had come to us ... we seized and brought him to the king, our lord.
When the goddess Ištar, supreme lady, looks upon this work with pleasure, may a good word for me be set upon her lips! May she make my weapons prevail over all (my) enemies! May she make all of the rulers bow down at my feet!
... in the palace
Month of Marchesvan (VIII), 15th day, eponym year of Abi-lešir, governor of Arbela.
I am now waiting for the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
Witness Nabû-duru-beli.
for Sin-abu-uṣur;
May the goddess Ištar, supreme lady, look upon this work with pleasure and may a good word for me be set upon her lips! May she make my weapons prevail over all (my) enemies!
... the troops of the king, my lord, ...
The king, my lord, knows that the city of Der is situated like a mountain. The gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), and Nabû, who love me, made me conquer that city. I brought out the people living in it and counted (them) as booty. I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire that city. I turned (it) into a mound of ruins (lit. “a mound and ruins”)...
of the palace superintendents ...
The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The king, my lord, should ask the son of Yakin: "Why did you not write to the king, your lord, until now?" Now, if you are alive, write to the king, your lord! If you are dead, you are dead!
... he is coming
If he appoints him, is it pleasing to your great divinity? Is it acceptable to your great divinity?
Afterwards, I sent 20,000 soldiers of mine to the aid of the king of Elam. They brought about their defeat in a pitched battle. They cut off the head of the king of Elam and brought it before me. They placed the head of the king of Elam around the neck of the king, my lord.
Witness Abi-Aya.
The money is paid completely. That woman is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
NN, porter;
The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number. The heart of the ram is normal.
Concerning the ... s of NN about whom Aššur-... wrote to the king, my lord: "The men ...
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord.
... Witness Bel-dan, son of Bel-na'di.
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, and (then) brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummah, fortified cities, together with the district of the land Bīt-Barrû, and I added (this area) to the territory of Assyria.
Witness Mannu-...
The palace of Aššur-dān, king of Assyria, son of Tiglath-pileser (II), king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (II) (who was) also king of Assyria: (slab) belonging to the house of boxwood.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May the great gods bestow long days, well-being and joy upon the king, my lord!
After I had made the statue of Aššur, king of the gods, the father of the gods, the creator of the Igīgū and Anunnakū gods, the creator of the great gods, the one who decrees the destinies of the Igīgū and Anunnakū gods, the one who decrees the fates of the great gods, the one who decrees the destinies of the great gods, the one who decrees the fates of the great gods, the one who decrees the destinies of the great gods, the one who decrees the fates
A shoulder; a cut of shoulder of an ox;
Month of Shebat (XI), 14th day, eponym year of La-baši, commander-in-chief of Assyria.
1 grove of poplars; a well;
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of Marduk-šarru-uṣur. He has always treated me justly and given me confidence. Now, if he commands, I will go and speak with him, and if he commands, I will bring him here and let him speak with the king, my lord. If he commands, I will bring him here and let him speak with the king, my lord.
Concerning the house of the king of Assyria about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let the house be built" —
We are keeping the watch which the king, our lord, assigned to us.
The king, my lord, should ask the scribe of the palace ...
Seal of NN, ... ,
I made (the god) Aššur, the great lord, enter inside (it) and made (him) reside in Ešarra, the inner sanctum of his divinity. I offered sumptuous offerings before him and presented (him) with my gifts. I made fine oil from olives and aromatics. I had the heads of the subjects of my land drenched (and) watered their insides with sweet wine.
1, Nabû-šarru-uṣur, governor of Nineveh;
... the temple of the goddess Ištar ...
the sons of their father ...
8 ditto, ditto, the edging ditto;
The palace herald and the chief eunuch have come to me, saying: "The king has sent us to you."
... mina of silver
... to the city of Akkad
Witness ...
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria —
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether these men or his sons or his grandsons, seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Ahi-immê,
... this
The king, my lord, should not say: "Why did you not write me earlier?" I have now written to the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
If at the appearance of the moon one horn passes the other: there will be truth in the land, and the son will speak the truth with his father; universal peace.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did you not write ... ?" I did write ... , but the men of the king, my lord, did not agree to bring the logs ... to the river. Now, if the king, my lord, commands, they should bring the logs to the river. If not, they should bring them to the river of the Inner City.
In the charge of Ahu-duri, palace superintendent.
... the 'finger' is thick...
The king, my lord, should ask (about it).
The Pleiades are bright, the Pleiades are bright, the Pleiades are bright, the Pleiades are bright, the Pleiades are bright, the Pleiades are bright, the Pleiades are bright, the Pleiades are bright, the Pleiades are bright, the Pleiades are bright, the Pleiades are bright, the Pleiades are bright, the Pleiades are bright, the Pleiades are bright, the Pleiades are bright, the Pleiades are bright, the Pleiades are bright, the Pleiades are bright, the Ple
... the 'hand' of god
Witness Qurdi-Aya.
12 minas of silver, capital, fine imposed by the vizier, my lord, at the disposal of the chief treasurer.
Concerning the news of the king of Elam, he has crossed the river and has set on the bridge. He has heard that the troops of the Medes are assembled opposite him and that the troops of the Manneans are assembled opposite him on the other side of the bridge. He has become frightened and has turned around and is going to the city Bubilu. The troops of the Manneans and the troops of the Medes are waiting for him in the city Bubilu.
(As for) Umba-LAGABua, son of Bel-ibni, a servant of Aššur-belu-uṣur, son of Abi-lešir, a servant of Aššur-belu-uṣur, son of Abi-lešir, a servant of Aššur-belu-uṣur, son of Abi-lešir, a servant of Aššur-belu-uṣur, son of Abi-lešir, a servant of Aššur-belu-u
Witness Marduk-remanni, cohort commander.
1, the house of Abi-lešir ... ;
1 2-seah jar of hinhinu-seeds;
adjoining the field of the house of Šulmu-amur,
Il-immi, ... ;
3, Assurbanipal;
Month ... , 19th day, eponym year of Marduk-šarru-uṣur.
Nabû-šarru-uṣur, ... , has contracted and bought them from these gentlemen for 100 minas of copper.
Ashur-taklak,
The new baths of Anu:
He shall give the wine back in the month of Ab (V). If he does not, it shall increase by a fourth.
... this ...
The base of the middle 'finger' of the lung is 'loose.'
The temple of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, which ... the kings, my ancestors, had built had buckled and ... I removed its buckled parts. I built (and) completed (it) from top to bottom (and) deposited my monumental inscription.
10 ...
What is it that the king, my lord, commands?
Nabû-šumu-iddina ...
... this ...
The king's word to the Itu'eans: I am well, you can be glad.
The king, my lord, should ask the chief tailor whether or not he has given orders to the tailors.
We have written down the names of the gods who are in the house of Aššur and we are herewith sending them to the king, our lord. The king, our lord, should know (this).
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur.
Witness Šep-...
Witness ... Witness Aplu-uṣur.
adjoining the road that leads to the village of ... ,
... Ubrî
1, the chief tailor; 3, the tailors of the queen mother;
Bel-dan,
there ...
Witness ... -Adad, ...
A tablet of Nabû-nadin-aplu to Nabû-nadin-aplu. Good health to my lord!
I have written to the Palace. Let them do as they find appropriate.
Concerning the king, my lord, about whom I wrote to the king, my lord: "He is ill" — he is not ill; he is well. He has recovered from the illness which he had. He has recovered from the illness which he had ...
the upper part of the 'finger' ...
... the goddess Šerua ... the goddess Šerua ... the goddess Šerua ... the goddess Šerua ... the goddess Šerua ...
He shall give the ... in Barhalzi.
... the base of the middle 'finger' of the lung is split.
The god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me and I mustered my troops. I took the road to the land Bīt-Daganna. I approached the city Bīt-Daganna and (then) conquered the city Bīt-Daganna. I carried off the people living in the city Bīt-Daganna, together with their gods, their property, their goods, their possessions, (and) their goods. I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire their cities. I did not leave a single person alive. I hung the corpses
If the sun stands in the halo of the moon: there will be truth in the land, and the son will speak the truth with his father; universal peace.
... of Nergal ...
1,000 stalks of vine ...
... , Bel-dan, his son, his wife, his two daughters, his son's wife, his two sons' wives, his son's son, his son's son's wife, his son's son's son's wife, his son's son's son's wife, his son's son's son's wife, his son's son's son's wife, his son's son's son's wife, his son's son's son's wife, his son's son's son's wife, his
Witness Il-dan, royal bodyguard.
The gods of the king, my lord, know that I am devoted to my lord. I have no life without my lord.
The money is paid completely. That field is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The woman Aya-ammu, who is now ill, and on whom the 'hand' of Nanaya of Uruk is being placed in extispicy —
... I shall send
not a month ...
He shall give the wine back in Iyyar (II).
May Marduk and Zarpanitu bless the crown prince!
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether these men or his sons or his grandsons, seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Zabinu and his sons,
... Ubrî
the 11th day;
and the people of his house ...
The Urarṭian ... has ... ed the city of ... and ... ed the city of ... , the cities of the Mannean king, my lord. He has ... ed the cities of the Mannean king, my lord.
On the 10th day, the god will be seen with the sun.
When the god Aššur, the great lord, the father of the gods, the one who decrees fates, the one who makes opposing forces agree, the one who resides in Eḫursaggalkurkurra, the great lord, the father of the gods, the one who decrees fates, the one who makes opposing forces agree, the one who resides in Eḫursaggula, the great lord, the father of the gods, the one who decrees fates, the one who makes opposing forces agree, the one who resides in Eḫursaggula
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
On the 5th of ... , Aššur-... , the son of the king, my lord, came to me in the Inner City, saying: "...
... the king, my lord,
Witness ... son of Bel-lu-dari.
— Venus stands in Leo.
a cup of olives;
If he appoints him, is it pleasing to your great divinity? Is it acceptable to your great divinity?
The king, my lord, should ask the chief eunuch whether there is any ... in the city of Akkad. If there is, let the king, my lord, send a eunuch of his to bring it to me, and I will give it to the king, my lord. If not, let the king, my lord, send me a sealed document and I will get it and bring it to the king, my lord.
... in the presence of Aššur ...
... their ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
1 duck, 10 turtledoves, served hot;
A thigh, a rib cut,
At that time, the temple of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, which the kings, my ancestors, had built had buckled and become weak. I removed its buckled parts. I (re)built (it) from top to bottom and made (it) as bright as day.
... the king, my lord,
Tiglath-pileser, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (I), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Mutakkil-Nusku (who was) also vice-regent of the god Aššur:
to ...
(As for) the governor of Waisi, the king, my lord, should not leave him in his hands! He is a criminal; he has committed a crime against the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should not leave him in his hands!
Witness Samnuha.
... the governor of Arpad
The house of my father is well.
a 2-seah jar of bittersweet beer;
... the house of my father in ...
... he will die.
... I will go ...
from the women ...
... for the sake of my life
1, Nabû-šezib;
... the king should ask ...
of the day ...
The palace of Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I), king of Assyria, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also king of Assyria: (slab) belonging to the house of boxwood. Whoever erases my inscribed name (or) places (it) in the service of a god (or another) person, may the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of
... the king, my lord,
... the city Ḫarḫar ...
to the son of A...
... the 'hand' of god ...
... ditto ditto the front red, of the port, not;
If Jupiter, the king of the gods, the lord of the lands, the light of the gods, the foremost of the gods, the one who decrees fates, the one who makes decisions for the Igīgū and Anunnakū gods, the one who makes decisions for the great gods, the one who decrees fates, the one who makes decisions for the great gods, the one who makes decisions for the great gods, the one who decrees fates, the one who makes decisions for the great gods, the one who makes decisions for the great gods, the one who decrees f
the 'path' ...
... the king, my lord, should ask the chief eunuch and the chief scribe whether there is any fault of mine before the king, my lord.
of the king, your lord ...
The 14th day, when the moon is seen with the sun.
... the chariot drivers
I am now waiting for the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, wait for me until the city of Akkad is built, and I can then come and serve the king, my lord.
I shall do ...
We shall write whatever the king, our lord, commands. We shall not change the wording of the tablet which we are sending to the king, our lord.
The palace of Amēl-Marduk, king of Babylon, son of Nebuchadnezzar (II), king of Babylon, descendant of Sennacherib, king of Assyria.
He shall give them back in the month of Nisan (I). If he does not, they shall increase by the same amount.
Now, may the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
The king, my lord, should ask the crown prince and the crown prince's brother whether they have not been negligent about the king, my lord's affairs.
in all 1,200 — the 'residences' of the king;
I am now sending ... to the king, my lord.
... to the presence of ...
2 qa,
NN ...
Now, I have written to the vizier, my lord. Let my lord do as he finds appropriate.
... beer, 3 litres per day;
... I will speak
Seal of ... , owner of the fields and vineyards being sold.
Nabû-eriba, servant of Hanubuni;
who ... ed the ...
Witness ... -ilu.
The palace of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, descendant of the eternal line of Bēl-bāni, son of Adasi, the priest of the temple of the god Aššur, whose place of ultimate origin is Baltil (Aššur), king of the four quarters (of the world),
... to the king, my lord ... I shall speak ...
On the 10th of Nisan (I), the king of Assyria will set out and take up his residence in the Inner City.
Witness Nabû-šezib, ditto ditto.
Witness Mannu-lušezib.
The gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Nergal, (and) Nusku, the great gods, my lords, decreed curses, as many as are written in the treaties, upon me as my punishment.
in ...
... news of
The palace of Adad-nārārī, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Arik-dīn-ili, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Enlil-nārārī (who was) also vice-regent of the god Aššur:
Month of Sivan (III), 1st day.
The god Aššur, father of the gods, made all of the Igīgū and Anunnakū gods bow down at the feet of the god Enlil, his lord. The god Enlil, the lord of the lands, decreed a destiny of well-being for the god Aššur, his lord.
(As for) Umba-LAGABua, son of Teumman — a (former) king of the land Elam — who sat on the throne of the land Elam after Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II) (and) who came to the aid of Šamaš-šuma-ukīn — (my) hostile brother — (and) who sent his troops to fight with my troops, the troops of the god Aššur, my lord, brought about his defeat in a pitched battle. Umba-LAGabua, son
The king, my lord, should ask ...
When the silver is paid completely, the field and the house are purchased and acquired. That woman is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
... I made (them) take the road to the city Ḫarḫar.
the man ...
... to Erišum-...
He who in his heart plots evil against his lord,
... day ...
2 'litres' of midru-bread; 2 'litres' of spiced bread;
... the king, my lord, should know (this).
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
I am herewith sending over the letter which they sent to me from the Palace. The king, my lord, should read it.
of the 24th day, in the charge of Ištar-ibni.
On my third campaign, I marched against Baʾalu, the king of the land Tyre who resides in the middle of the sea. Because he did not honor my royal command(s and) did not obey the pronouncement(s) from my lip(s), I set up outposts against him. To prevent his people from leaving, I reinforced (its) garrison. By sea and dry land, I took control of (all of) his routes (and thus) cut off (all) access to him.
Concerning the ... s about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me:
an estate of x hectares of land adjoining the road which leads from the village of ... to the village of ... , adjoining the field of Nabû-... —
When the king, my lord, ...
Nabû-duru-uṣur, son of A... , his servant —
... s
Witness Issar-nadin-aplu, scribe.
The corn taxes of these fields, houses and people shall not be collected, the straw taxes shall not be gathered. These people shall not be called up for labour and corvée service or for the levy of the land; they are free from quay, gate and gate dues on land  or water.
Why did you write to me, "The son of Yakin is coming,"  (when) he is not coming?
May the goddess Ištar, supreme lady, look upon this work with pleasure and may a good word for me be set upon her lips!
The 'path' is present.
... his handiwork
Witness Dannu-...
The son of Yakin-Lû, the son of Yakin-Lû, the son of Yakin-Lû, the son of Yakin-Lû, the son of Yakin-Lû, the son of Yakin-Lû, the son of Yakin-Lû, the son of Yakin-Lû, the son of Yakin-Lû, the son of Yakin-Lû, the son of Yakin-Lû, the son of Yakin-Lû, the son of Yakin-L
... Egašankalamma ...
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether these men or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or his prefect or his governor or his mayor or his city-lord or his mayor or his prefect or his nephew or his brother or his nephew or his prefect or his mayor or his city-lord or his mayor or his prefect or his nephew or his brother or his nephew or his prefect or his city-lord or his mayor or his prefect or his nephew or his nephew or his prefect or his city-lord or his nep
Witness Na'di-ilu.
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, and (then) brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ḫardišpu (and) Bīt-Kilamzaḫ, fortified cities, together with the district of the land Bīt-Šaʾalli, and I added (this area) to the territory of Assyria.
... the woman ...
... the district of the land of Akkad ... the land of Akkad ...
... of Nineveh ...
Witness Remut-ili.
The palace herald and the chief of accounts are exempt.
... of Assyria ...
they go ...
The king, my lord, can be glad.
... the king, my lord, ... the gods of heaven and earth ... the gods of Assyria ... the gods of Akkad ... the gods of the land of Sumer and Akkad ... the gods of the land of Elam ... the gods of the land of the Arameans ... the gods of the land of the Qutu ... the gods of the land of the Uqumanu ... the gods of the land of the Šubaru ... the gods of the land of the Yasubigallians ... the gods of the land of the Lullumu ... the gods of the land of
... I made ... bow down at my feet (and) ... I ... their ... I ... their ... I ... their ...
... his son
Nabû-šezibanni;
... to the king ...
in all 1, the 'residences' of the son of Zabî;
to ...
I have now written to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should do as he finds appropriate. The king, my lord, should not say: "Why did you not write ... ?"
For the god Nabû, his lord: Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of Assyria, dedicated (this) for his life.
If it is agreeable to the king, my lord, let them give me ...
Witness Šar-Issar, ...
1 talent of silver by the mina of Carchemish belonging to Se'-sakâ, at the disposal of Zabayu, son of Ahi-ṭaba.
At that time, the temple of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, which the Arameans had built had buckled and become weak.
At that time, the temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, my mistress, which Shalmaneser (III), son of Ashurnasirpal (II), son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), son of Adad-nārārī (II) (and) son of Arik-dīn-ili, son of Enlil-nārārī, son of Aššur-uballiṭ (II) (and) son of Erība-Adad (II), had built — that
owner of the ... being sold.
Witness NN, cohort commander.
At that time, the temple of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, which the kings, my ancestors, had built had buckled and become weak. I removed its buckled parts. I built (and) completed (it) from top to bottom (and) deposited my monumental inscription.
... which ...
Concerning what I wrote to the king, my lord: "The son of Yakin has written to me: 'I will come to the king, my lord'" — he has now come to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should ask him why he did not come earlier. He should also ask him why he did not come to the king, my lord, when the king, my lord, was in Assyria. Now he has come to the king, my lord, when the king, my lord, is ill.
40 sheep, 40 shekels of silver, 4 togas, 4 tunics, all tribute: the Palace Superintendent;
Does your great divinity know it? Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
1, the Itu'ean scribe, deputy chief scribe;
... his ...
The land of the Hagaranu is well.
... , ditto;
The coils of the colon are ... in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
a tureen of soup;
... of this month
son of Aššur-šallimanni, chief cook;
... I mustered ... and ... I made (them) take the road to Babylon. I marched ... I crossed the Euphrates in rafts (made of inflated) goatskins. I crossed the Surappu River in rafts (made of inflated) goatskins. I crossed the Uqnû River in rafts (made of inflated) goatskins. I crossed the Euphrates in rafts (made of inflated) goatskins. I crossed the Surappu River in rafts (made of infl
... the upper part and the lower part are equal ...
From Ašaredu the older, servant of the king.
... his ... in his eyes
Witness Adad-šumu-...
total, the temple of Nabû-šarra-uṣur;
... and ...
The money is paid completely. That woman is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... 44 ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto
Now they are ...
in all 1,000 — the sons of the cohort commander;
a total of 180 Kushite horses trained to the yoke have come in.
... they are plotting
... I have sent ... to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
... in the middle of the land of Akkad, in the midst of the land of Sumer and Akkad, in the middle of the land of the Kassites, in the middle of the land of the Yasubigallians, in the middle of the land of the ... , in the middle of the land of the ... , in the middle of the land of the ... , in the middle of the land of the ... , in the middle of the land of the ... , in the middle of the land of the ... , in the middle of the land of the ... , in the middle of the
... the land of the Yasubigallians
From Issar-šumu-ereš.
the lower part ...
... Witness Sin-šarru-uṣur, treasurer.
... ditto ditto ... ;
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nadin-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
On my return march, I received a substantial payment from the distant Medes (and) the kings, my lords, (ii 5) and (thus) I made them bow down to the yoke of my lordship. (As for) the Mannean(s), a troublesome mountain people, who since time immemorial had not submitted to the yoke of my lordship, I conquered (and) destroyed their cities.
of the king ...
Witness Marduk-naṣir, ...
The gods of the house of Aššur.
... the king, my lord,
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
Witness Nabû-...
... there is
The king, my lord, should ask ...
3 bags of (mixed) kernels.
Witness Na'di-Aya.
... of Marduk-šarru-uṣur
... and his people, ... ,
The palace herald and the magnates of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, who are now going to the district of Media to collect a tribute of horses, shall bring the tribute of horses to the city of Calah, before Aššur and Mullissu, and shall deliver it to the chief eunuch, who will bring it to the palace of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria.
the ... which ...
The gods of the king, my lord, ... the land of Akkad ... the land of Akkad ...
... I made ... bow down at my feet (and) ... I placed a representative (of mine) over them. I imposed upon Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan) a heavy punishment, a harsh punishment, an unhealing punishment, and I did not leave him alive.
Nabû-eṭir-napšati,
To the goddess Ningal, his lady: Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of Assyria, dedicated (this) for his life.
... the land of Akkad, the land of Sumer and Akkad
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
On my eighth campaign, I marched against Baʾalu, the king of the land Tyre who resides in the middle of the sea. Because he did not honor my royal command(s and) did not obey the pronouncement(s) from my lip(s), I set up outposts against him. To prevent his people from leaving, I reinforced (its) garrison. By sea and dry land, I took control of (all of) his routes (and thus) cut off (all) access to him.
Witness NN, scribe.
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
... of this month ...
The city Šuru, a fortress of the land Bīt-Daganna, which Šamaš-rēša-uṣur, king of Assyria, had built and which had become dilapidated, (re)built by the command of the god Aššur, the great lord, my lord, and (re)built its walls. The city Šuru, which had become dilapidated, (re)built by the command of the god Aššur, the great lord, my lord, and (re)built its walls. The city Šuru,
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: reliable speech; the land will become happy.
When you are to pour out a libation bowl ...
1 reinforced lower garment;
and (whether) ... will occur to him.
Witness Riba-ahhe.
Month Iyyar (II), 10th day, eponym year of Šamaš-kašid-ayabi.
of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, ...
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
From Balasî.
... I shall send ... to the king, my lord. Let them bring the ... and the ... s to me, and I will give them to the chief eunuch.
The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did you not write (about it)?" —
May the god Marduk, the great lord, the Enlil of the gods, the one who decrees fates, look upon this work with pleasure and may a good word for the king, my lord, be set upon his lips!
If the sun stands in the halo of the moon: the king of the land will stand in his truth.
... the city ...
The palace of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, descendant of the eternal line of Bēl-bāni, son of Adasi, founder of the city Qarrātu.
... and you sing, “... ”
in all x persons, servants of NN, the cohort commander —
Witness Šumma-Adad. Witness Ahu-lamur.
... his son Bel-Harran-belu-uṣur, son of Humbu-ukin, a servant of his, who had fled to Assyria, ... the city of Šiddi-hiriti ... the city of Šiddi-hiriti ...
10 homers of barley according to the seah of 8 'litres' belonging to Remanni-Adad the chief chariot driver, at the disposal of Ahu'a, the scribe of the chief chariot driver, at the disposal of Ahu'a, the scribe of the chief chariot driver.
The palace of Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of Assyria: ...
Witness Šarru-emuranni, servant of the governor of Arbela.
The ... which they throw ... , is the ... of Anu. He throws it into the ... of Belat-ekalli. The ... which he throws ... is the blood of the ... of Anu. He throws it into the ... of Belat-ekalli.
Concerning what you wrote to me: "...
The money is paid completely. That house and field are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, chariot driver.
... as much as I
The coils of the colon are 16 in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
... Now he is with him
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the king. I have no house of my own. I have no servant or ... I have no ... I have no ... I have no ... I have no ... I have no ... I have no ... I have no ... I have no ... I have no ... I have no ... I have no ... I have no ... I have no ... I have no ... I have no ... I have no ... I have no ...
... the 'station' ...
The lower part ... the left of the gall bladder is split. The base of the middle part ...
a cup of quinces;
10 talents 15 minas of red wool ... ;
— Jupiter stood there for a month of days.
... Abi-qamu ...
The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... son of NN, 3 ...
3 ... ;
I enlarged the structure of the palace to 440 large cubits along (its) longer side and 200 large cubits along (its) shorter side and (thus) I made its site bigger. I raised its superstructure 190 courses of brick high.
The base of the 'station' is loose.
I am now waiting for them. If they do not come, I will go and see the king, my lord. I will also speak with the king, my lord, and I will not leave until I have seen the king, my lord. I will then come and tell everything to the king, my lord.
of the house of Anu-... , the maid of the house of Anu-... —
The rams of the sacrifice are at hand.
And if he appoints him, is it pleasing to your great divinity? Is it acceptable to your great divinity?
I am now waiting for them. When they have returned, I shall immediately write to the king, my lord. I shall also wait for the troops of the king, my lord, and then set out to take the road.
I have written ...
The palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of Assyria: (slab) belonging to the house of boxwood, a gift from the land Tabal, (rev. 5) (and) belonging to the house of cedar, a gift from the land Ḫatti. Whoever erases my inscribed name (or) places (it) in the service of a
Afterwards, the son of Yakin-Lû, the son of Yakin-Lû, the son of Yakin-Lû, the son of Yakin-Lû, the son of Yakin-Lû, the son of Yakin-Lû, the son of Yakin-Lû, the son of Yakin-Lû, the son of Yakin-Lû, the son of Yakin-Lû, the son of Yakin-Lû, the son of Yakin-Lû, the son of Yak
Witness Zababa-eriba.
The men of the Itu'eans who were in my service ...
... to the king ...
... with me
I conquered the city Ḫirimmu, together with its district. I conquered the city Ḫarutu, together with its district. I conquered the city Ḫarutu, together with its district. I conquered the city Ḫarutu, together with its district. I conquered the city Ḫarutu, together with its district. I conquered the city Ḫarutu, together with its district.
The money is paid completely. That woman is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
a basket of (mixed) fruit;
Zizî;
... I sent
an estate of 1 hectare of land adjoining Mannu-ki-Arbail;
the 10th day, the 11th day, the 12th day, the 13th day, the 14th day, the 15th day, the 16th day, the 17th day, the 18th day, the 19th day, the 20th day, the 21st day, the 22nd day, the 23rd day, the 24th day, the 25th day, the 26th day, the 27th day, the
... I made ... enter ... I brought out ... from the city ... and I counted (them) as booty. I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire ... I annexed to Assyria (... )
... in the presence ...
... of the son of Yakin
... his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his
If Venus disappears in the east in Ab (V) from the 1st to the 30th day: there will be deaths.
of the days ...
Nabû-eṭir-napšati, the scribe of Aššur-belu-taqqin, has come to me, saying: "The king, my lord, should know that I am a servant of the king, my lord. I have no house of my own. I have no field of my own. I have no orchard of my own. I have no house of my own."
... the district of the city Ḫarḫar
To the king, my lord: your servant Gabbu-ana-Aššur.
The land of Akkad.
the whole of the land of Sikris ...
Witness ... ayu.
... Nabû-šarra-uṣur
1 seah 1 'litre' of regular offering loaves;
... of the god Aššur, great lord, my lord, ...
Nabû-taklak, servant of these gentlemen —
adjoining the house of Kê-lamši, adjoining the house of Ilu-šumki,
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Month Iyyar (II), 15th day, eponym year of Abi-lešir.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, have jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
Month of Ša-sarrāte, ... th day, eponymy of ...
Witness Nabû-zeru-lešir.
To the king, my lord: your servant Mannu-ki-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord! The land of the king my lord is well.
I have sent three letters to the Palace. I have not heard a reply to any of them. I have not seen a sign from the Palace. I have become worried and depressed.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or touched anything unclean, (or) changed or altered the proceedings...
... the Itu'eans
their words ...
20 male sheep, 20 jars of wine,
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: reliable speech; the land will become happy; the gods will remember Akkad favorably.
... I marched to Assyria ... I mustered the numerous troops of the god Aššur, my lord, ... I took the direct road against the land Elam ... I crossed the Idide River, a tempestuous flood, in rafts made of inflated ... I ascended Mount Kašiiari, a mighty mountain, ... I conquered the land Elam ... I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire their cities.
The palace herald ... has said to the king, my lord: "... the son of the king ...
The money is paid completely. That woman is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The king, my lord, knows that I am a poor man; I have no house, no field, no orchard, no well, no spring, no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ...
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the king, my lord. I have no house, no field, no orchard, no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ...
... the king, my lord, ...
The men of the governor of Arrapha who went to the district of the Zabayateans, the men of the governor of Arrapha who went to the district of the Zabayateans, and the men of the governor of Arrapha who went to the district of the Zabayateans, a total of 3 men, have been killed.
From Nergal-kabti-ahhe.
I am now waiting for the troops of the Medes, who are coming to the aid of the Cimmerians. When they have come, I shall immediately write to the king, my lord.
... of the enemy
... much ...
The gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Nergal, (and) Nusku, the great gods, my lords, decreed as my destiny a life of long days, years of good health, ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ...
... of the 'cap'
The handiwork is done.
The woman Aya-ramu, who ...
Abi-qamu ...
When the king, my lord, sent me to the house of my lords, I was not able to enter the house of my lords.
Witness Issar-duri.
Nabû-eṭir-napšati,
Moreover, (as for) Ṣidqâ, the king of the city Ashkelon who had not bowed down to my yoke, I forcibly removed the gods of his father’s house, himself, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his brothers, (and other) offspring of his father’s house and took him to Assyria.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
... the people of Assyria ...
The palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of Assyria: (slab) belonging to the house of boxwood.
Aššur-belu-taqqin has written to me from the Palace: "The magnates are coming to Dur-Šarrukku. Let them come and see the king of Assyria."
The middle of the 'station' is effaced. The 'path' ...
... ditto ditto ... ;
... Dadî,
... Ahu-duri
... The 'path' is present. The 'strength' is present...
The city Ḫirimmu, a fortress of the land Unqi, which the Manneans had taken away by force in the time of the kings, my ancestors, and which the Manneans had held for a number of years, (v 1) then rebelled against the Mannean and (re)established its city-wall. They strengthened its city-wall more than before, and (then) settled therein the people of the lands that they had conquered. They brought down from the mountains the people of the land Mannea and the land Media and made (
Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, has contracted and bought them from these gentlemen for 10 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
1 ... , the ... of the palace herald;
Property of the goddess Ištar of Uruk, queen of the universe.
3 sheep, 2 bowls of wine,
Witness NN, servant of the tailor ...
Month of Ulūlu, third day.
The messengers of the king, my lord, who went to the city of Aššur-le'i, have returned and told me: "The king, my lord, has sent us to the city of Akkad."
Now, what are the king my lord's orders? Let the king, my lord, write me what the king my lord commands, and I will do accordingly.
Afterwards, Teumman, the (very) image of a gallû-demon, sat on the throne of Urtaku. He constantly sought out evil (ways) to kill the children of Urtaku (and) the children of Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II), the brother of Urtaku, the king of the land Elam. Ummanigaš, the brother of Urtaku, the king of the land Elam, who did not remember the kindness that I had done for him, incited Teumman to kill the children of Urtaku and
To the king, my lord: your servant Urad-Nanaya. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur, Sin, Šamaš, Bel and Nabû bless the king, my lord!
I have sent ... to the Palace. They are bringing ... , and I shall bring them to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should ask them where the men are.
On the 13th of Nisan (I), I set out from ... and went to ... , where the king, my lord, sent me. I have inspected the houses and the fields which the king, my lord, gave to me, and I have collected the straw and the beams which were there.
... of oxen
Afterwards, the people of the land Ḫimme, who had not submitted to my yoke, rebelled against me. I mustered chariots, cavalry, (and) infantry (and) marched against them. I conquered, plundered, destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire their cities. I brought about their defeat in the open country. I felled with the sword the people of the land Ḫimme, who had risen up against me. I hung their corpses on poles and placed (them) around their (city
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Concerning the merchants about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send them to me?" — I am now sending them to the king, my lord.
... 1/2 'litre';
The 'well-being' is present. The 'path' on the left of the gall bladder is present. The 'base of the throne' is present...
Witness ... -duri, son of Haldi-...
Nabû-bel-šumate,
... the base of the 'finger' is split. The 'weapon'-mark of the 'increment' rises towards the left of the 'finger.'
... to your seed ...
I brought the people of the land Ḫatti (Syria-Palestine) who had fled before my weapons and had taken refuge in the land Elam, out of the land Elam, which is in the midst of the sea, and I counted (them) as booty. I placed (them) under the authority of a eunuch of mine, the governor of the city Arrapḫa. I had my garrisons and troops stationed in the land Ḫatti (Syria-Palestine) and I made (them) keep watch over the land
From Ašaredu.
... the king, my lord, ...
The people of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of
... the priest of Anu ...
Witness ...
... the deputy
When the king, my lord, was in Assyria, I was in the service of the chief eunuch. Now the king, my lord, has summoned me to Babylon. I have come, but the chief eunuch has not summoned me. I have been waiting for the chief eunuch, my lord, for five days, but he has not summoned me.
... the heart of the ram is normal...
adjoining the field of Ešarra-šarru-ibni, the ... ,
... ditto ditto ... ;
The temple of ...
Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Shalmaneser (I) (who was) also king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of Assyria, descendant of Aššur-dān (I) (who was) also king of Assyria, descendant of Sennacherib (I) (who was) also king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II) (who was) also king
To the king, my lord: your servant, Bel-le'i. Good health to the king, my lord!
sheep ...
The god Aššur, father of the gods, made all of the Igīgū and Anunnakū gods bow down at my feet (and) elevated me for shepherding the land and people. He gave me a just scepter that widens borders (and) he put in my hand a merciless rod to fell enemies.
to Aššur-šumu-iddina, the ...
Witness Šulmu-šarri.
1 bag of (mixed) kernels. 3 ... of sesame;
400 sheep, 4 ...
Witness Tarditu-Aššur, merchant.
After I had finished the work on my palace, I invited inside it the god Aššur, the great lord, (and) the gods and goddesses living in Assyria, and (then) I made splendid offerings before them and presented (them) with my gifts. I made fine oil from olives and aromatics. At the inauguration of the palace, I had the heads of the subjects of my land drenched (and) I watered their insides with sweet wine. I had the heads of the subjects of my land drenched (and) I watered
Witness Banî, deputy chief physician.
Eponym year of Kanunayu, treasurer.
Witness Ubru-Nabû, from the town of Arbail.
... of the month
we ...
Witness Mannu-ki-Aššur, chariot driver of the palace superintendent.
he/they ...
... and I did
20 ... , the merchant ...
The 'path' on the left of the gall bladder has fissures like a snake...
... of the goddess Ištar
1, 1, the 'third men' of the recruitment officers of the Gurreans;
a 2-seah jar of Assyrian budê-confection;
... I have written
... I have written to my lord.
... 6 ... , the temple scribe of Ninurta;
... bulls
total 2: land of the chief cupbearer.
... to the king ...
... my land
I have written ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... the city of Šamaš-abu-uṣur
... the palace herald in the city of Harran
... s of Elam ...
... beer, to the Ukkean ...
The woman Nabû-eṭir-napšati, who is placed as a pledge at the disposal of the chief tailor,
I am now waiting for the king, my lord. When the king, my lord, has returned, I shall come and kiss the feet of the king, my lord.
... bull colossi
Moreover, (as for) the one who removes my inscriptions and my name: May the god Aššur, my lord, overthrow his sovereignty (and) destroy his name (and) his seed from the land.
This is its interpretation. (But) what is the news of the king, my lord?
Witness Didî, ditto.
When you are to strew salt before Sîn in the evening, you say: “Sîn, Šamaš, Iššar, Ninurta, and Nusku, vizier of the gods, accept life!”
The king, my lord, should ask the ... s of the palace superintendents and the palace herald whether there is any barley (here).
total, the ...
... of A...
... he says: "...
The gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Nergal, (and) Nusku, the great gods, my lords, decreed a curse, a grievous curse, upon me as my fate.
the cities of the Itu'eans ...
Witness Qurdi-Aya, eunuch ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Issar-duri. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
And concerning the Itu'eans about whom you wrote to me: "They are in our presence" — why did you not send them to me? Now send them to me!
A vacant lot adjoining the road which leads from the village of Nabû-šallim to the village of Nabû-šallim —
1 homer of barley, 10 shekels of silver, 10 togas, and a tunic, a tribute: the Palace Herald;
the land of the Yasubigallians
1 seah, the 21st day;
of the temple of the goddess Ištar.
... which in the month of Nisan (I)
The servants of Bel-ahu-uṣur and the servants of the king, my lord, are in the presence of the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, ask them whether they are servants of the king, my lord, or not.
I conquered the city Ulluba, together with the district of the city Ulluba, which is in the land Unqi. I conquered the city Ḫarutu, together with the district of the city Ḫarutu, which is in the land Unqi. I conquered the city Uppa, together with the district of the city Uppa, which is in the land Unqi. I conquered the city Tūbu, together with the district of the city Tūbu, which is in the land Unqi.
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria —
Nabû-zeru-lešir,
Witness Šamaš-ahu-iddina, scribe.
a cup of small onions; a cup of quinces;
Now then I am waiting for the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
The woman Šamaš-abu-uṣur, maid of these gentlemen —
... they are saying
The city of Sikris.
Month Iyyar (II), 14th day, eponym year of Nabû-šarru-uṣur.
The messenger of the son of Yakin-Lû has come to me, saying: "He has come to Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, to do obeisance to you." I have sent my messenger to him, and he has brought him to me. He has come with a letter from the son of Yakin-Lû, his lord.
NN, son of Zabayu, servant of the chief eunuch, has contracted and bought them from Zabayu for 10 minas of silver.
4 ... -garments, felted, the edging ditto;
From Bel-šuma-iškun, the priest of Ezida.
Now, let me send ... to the king, my lord.
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-reṣuwa. Good health to the king, my lord!
(As for) Ubru-Nergal, the ... of the Itu'eans, who had incited the men of the Itu'eans to plot murder, he himself fell into their hands.
at the disposal of ...
The one who crushed the Barnaki, a dangerous enemy, who live in the city Tīl-Ašurri, which is called Pitānu in the language of the people of the land Miḫrānu;
10 houses ...
the governor ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send an answer to my letter?" —
... I made (it) an object of wonder. I raised its superstructure 100 courses of brick high.
An estate of 3 hectares of land belonging to Ṭab-šar-Sin,
what I have not ...
Witness Nergal-aplu-...
... the king, my lord, knows that the ... of the land of Akkad are many.
the rest to ...
... the town of the Itu'eans, a fortress of the king, my lord,
... of the king, my lord, ... I have sent ...
The god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons prevail over all (my) enemies. He made all of the rulers bow down at my feet (and) elevated me for shepherding the land and people.
I have written ...
Witness NN, chariot driver.
Seal of Sa'iru, owner of the ... being sold.
The palace of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, descendant of the eternal line of Bēl-bāni, son of Adasi, founder of the city Qarrātu.
1 sheep, 1 bowl of wine: Sin-na'di;
... the temple of Anu
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
The palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of Assyria: (slab) belonging to the house of boxwood.
To the 'farmer,' my lord: your servant Assurbanipal. Good health to my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless my lord! May they give happiness and physical well-being to my lord!
Aššur-iddina, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send me a detailed report on the health of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria?"
... his ...
... to his son ...
the 'path' is present ...
... the coils of the colon are 14 in number...
The land of the king is well; the forts are well; the king, my lord, can be glad.
I set Šarru-lū-dāri, son of Rūkibtu, their former king, over the people of the city Ashkelon and imposed upon him the payment of tribute (and) gifts (in recognition) of my overlordship so that he (now) pulls my yoke.
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good, be it faulty, (and that) the day is advanced...
When the god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons prevail over all (my) enemies, (v 1) at that time the temple of the god Aššur, my lord, which Shalmaneser (III), son of Ashurnasirpal (II), a ruler who came before me, had built had become dilapidated and I (re)built (it) from top to bottom. I deposited my monumental inscription.
In the evening, the houses of the magnates
an estate of 4 decares adjoining the house of Nabû-šallim-ahhe;
... the treasurer
Total, 1 son of his; 1 wife; 1 daughter, weaned: a grand total of 4 people.
The king, my lord, sent me to the Palace. I have collected 500 sheep and 500 goats and brought them to the Palace.
Witness NN, ... of the Itu'eans.
of ... ya.
... of the land of Akkad ... I made ... rise ... I made ... rise ... I made ... rise ... I made ... rise ... I made ... rise ...
... of Nabû-šarru-uṣur ...
... and his people,
Il-nadin-ahhe,
The king, my lord, should do as he finds appropriate.
Witness Samnuha-sîn-na'di.
The base of the middle 'finger' of the lung is 'loose.'
... of silver, of the ... merchant ... merchant
Witness Šamaš-šarru-uṣur, chariot driver.
If the moon is surrounded by a halo, and Jupiter stands in it: the king of Akkad will be shut up.
The Itu'eans of the city of Der have come to me, saying: "The king, our lord, has ordered us to go to the city of Der."
... the city of Aššur
The 30th day ... the god ... the god ... the god ...
... of the land of Akkad
If Jupiter is black: the king of Akkad will die.
and when he saw that I had not come ...
Moreover, (as for) Ṣidqâ, the king of the city Ashkelon who had not bowed down to my yoke, I forcibly removed the gods of his father’s house, himself, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his brothers, (and other) offspring of his father’s house and took him to Assyria.
And concerning the work on the river about which I wrote to the king, my lord: "They are working on it" — they are indeed working on it.
The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
15, Bel-le'i;
... the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send ... ?"
The palace herald and the chief tailor of the king, my lord, should come and see the work.
... for the sake of ...
... the city Ḫarḫar ... I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered. I brought out ... , ... , oxen, and sheep and goats without number, and I counted (them) as booty.
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether Remutti-ilu or his sons or his brothers or his nephews, seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Ahi-qamu and his sons,
Concerning the ... s of the ... s about whom I wrote to the king, my lord,
... I made greater than my forefathers ...
The temple of the goddess Ištar of Uruk, which Shalmaneser (III), king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also king of Assyria, had built — that temple had buckled and its walls had buckled.
Witness Qurdi-ilu. Witness Šamaš-ka''in-aplu.
From Nergal-eṭir.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Who is this Ṣalaya whom you wrote about?" —
The king, my lord, should ask the palace superintendent and the palace scribe whether the servants of the palace superintendent and the palace scribe have been exempt from corn taxes and straw taxes.
If Venus disappears in the east and sets in the west: the king of the land will die; the land will become small; the gods will abandon the land; the king of the land will die; the land will become small; the gods will abandon the land; the king of the land will die.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
I shall go ...
Witness Bel-...
Witness Na'di-ilu, ditto.
Nabû-šuma-iddina, son of Aššur-eṭir, son of Nabû-eṭir, son of Aššur-eṭir, son of Aššur-eṭir, son of Aššur-eṭir, son of Aššur-eṭir, son of Aššur-eṭir, son of Aššur-eṭir, son of Aššur-eṭir, son of Aššur-eṭir, son of Aššur-eṭ
... he will die.
This is its interpretation.
and whom we shall kill.
Nabû-šuma-iddina, king of Babylon, the one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, the one who reveres the great gods, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of the great gods, the one who is assiduous towards the rites of the great gods, the one who is assiduous towards the offerings of the great gods, the one who is assiduous towards the festivals of the great gods, the one who is assiduous towards the rites of the great gods, the one who is assiduous towards the offerings of
If the moon at its appearance stands in a stable position: waiting for rain; there will be no flood, variant: the harvest of the land will prosper.
After I had finished the work on my palace, I invited inside it the god Aššur, the great lord, (and) the gods and goddesses living in Assyria, and (then) I made splendid offerings before them and presented (them) with my gifts... I made fine oil from olives and ...
1 prayer bowl ditto;
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord! The land and the forts of the king my lord are well. The king, my lord, can be glad.
Witness NN, cohort commander.
1,000 stalks of vine near the city of the ... ;
Nergal-ila'i, gardener; 1 son of his, of 4 spans' height; 1 woman: a total of 3 people.
This is the (interpretation) of the (omens) concerning the (re)settling of the land ...
Witness Šulmu-Issar.
10 cavalry mounts:
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Aššur-duru-uṣur or his sons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Zabinu,
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
... you shall not speak
2 hectares of field in the town of Abi-qamu, adjoining the field of the priest of the temple of the goddess Ištar, the field of the farmer Aplî, and the field of the farmer Aplî —
If there is a cross-shaped marking in the middle of the 'finger': the enemy's weapons will prevail over the prince's weapons.
... I conquered ... and ... I carried off ... I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire ... I captured ... I carried off ... I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire ...
Witness Šulmu-ahhe.
Month of Sivan (III), 11th day, eponym year of Sin-šarru-uṣur.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
... I made greater than my forefathers ... I built ... I made ... I ... I ... I ...
... there
Witness Šulmu-Nabû, scribe.
... of this year ...
... he ...
If a strange star comes close to Gemini: the ruler will die.
the city of Akkad ...
The city Ḫarḫar is the fortress of the king, my lord.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments...
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria. I have no house, no field, no orchard, no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... ,
Witness Nergal-ahu-uṣur, chief ...
of the land of Akkad ...
... the house of ...
3,000 stalks of vine near the city of Nineveh;
the singer ...
... the king, my lord
... of the king ...
1 ditto, ditto, ditto, 1 ditto, ditto, ditto, 1 ditto, ditto, ditto, 1 ditto, ditto, ditto, 1 ditto, ditto, ditto, 1 ditto, ditto, ditto, 1 ditto, ditto, ditto, 1 ditto, ditto, ditto, 1 ditto, ditto, ditto, 1 ditto, ditto, ditto, 1 ditto, ditto, ditto, 1 ditto, ditto
The king, my lord, knows that I am a dog of the king, my lord. I have no house, no field, no orchard, no well, no spring, no house-garden, no threshing-floor, no well, no spring, no house-garden, no threshing-floor, no well, no spring, no house-garden, no threshing-floor, no well, no spring, no house-garden, no threshing-floor, no well, no spring, no house-garden, no threshing-floor, no
The land of the chief cupbearer is well.
... the woman
... of the land of Akkad ... the chief eunuch
and ...
... the governors of the land of Akkad
The palace herald has contracted and bought them from Zabinu for 1 1/2 mina of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
10 oxen, 10 sheep, 10 jars of wine — the house of Aššur-šallimanni.
of Taurus ...
... my father from ...
6 (cuts of) meat, a bowl of wine: the Palace Superintendent;
... the gods Sîn, Šamaš, ... the goddess Ištar of ... the gods of Assyria ... I made (them) enter inside it. I offered sumptuous offerings before them and presented (them) with my gifts...
... of Marduk-šarru-uṣur
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the king, my lord. I have no house, no field, no orchard, no people. I have no servant. I have no one to rely upon.
The king, my lord, should not be afraid of this eclipse. The eclipse which took place in the morning watch and the evening watch is the same. The king, my lord, should not be afraid of it.
... the Itu'eans, the Arameans, the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the
Moreover, (as for) Ṣidqâ, the king of the city Ashkelon who had not bowed down to my yoke, I forcibly removed the gods of his father’s house, himself, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his brothers, (and other) offspring of his father’s house and took him to Assyria.
... I made greater than my forefathers. I built (and) completed Nēmed-Enlil, its outer wall, from its foundation(s) to its crenellations with baked bricks.
The palace herald and the chief eunuch have come to me, saying: "The king has ordered us to bring the ... s of the magnates into the city of Calah." We are now bringing the magnates' men and mules.
The palace of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, ...
The palace of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, descendant of the eternal line of Bēl-bāni, son of Adasi, king of Assyria, descendant of the eternal line of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, descendant of the eternal line of Tiglath-pileser (II), king of Assyria, descendant of the eternal line of Aššur-rēša-
adjoining the field of NN,
... I made greater than my forefathers.
I sent ...
Witness Ninuayu, ...
The eclipse ...
in all 19 gods of the house of Nabû,
Witness Aplu-uṣur.
a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
He shall pay the silver in its original amount in the city of Nineveh. If he does not pay, the field is acquired and taken.
NN, royal bodyguard;
On the 1st day of the month of Iyyar (II), the day of the watch,
From Nabû-šuma-iškun.
total, 3 houses of my father.
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or touched anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
Witness Ilu-taklak.
On my return march, I received a substantial payment from the distant Medes (and) the kings, my lords, (ii 5) (and) 1,000 talents of silver, 500 talents of gold, choice antimony, large blocks of lapis lazuli, (and) 1,000 talents of red-purple wool, as their audience gift. (ii 10) I placed a representative (of mine) over them and imposed upon them annual tribute payment (in recognition) of my overlordship.
To the king, my lord: your servant Il-šimki. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur, Mullissu, Sin, Šamaš, Bel, Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Gula, and Nergal bless the king, my lord!
... Aššur-šarru-uṣur
May the goddess Ištar, supreme lady, look upon this work with pleasure and may a good word for me be set upon her lips!
Shalmaneser, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (I), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of the god Aššur:
... of the goddess Ištar
If the Pleiades enter the moon and come out to the north: Akkad will become happy; the king of Akkad will become strong and have no rival.
and ... to the presence of ...
Witness Azi-... , ...
Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, viceroy of Ur and Eridu, who provides for Eridu, built the temple of the goddess Ištar of Agade for his life and the life of his city. He made the temple of the goddess Ištar of Agade, his lady, as bright as day. He made (it) shine like the sun and made (it) as bright as day. He made (it) as bright as day for the life of his city.
5 minas of silver, 5 togas, 5 tunics, and a ring of gold, all tribute, and 5 minas of silver, 5 togas, and 5 tunics, audience gift, all audience gift, all audience gift, all audience gift, all audience gift, all audience gift, all audience gift, all audience gift, all audience gift, all audience gift, all audience gift, all audience gift, all audience gift, all audience gift, all audience gift, all audience gift, all audience gift, all audience gift, all audience gift, all audience gift, all audience gift
You shall not make common cause with Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, nor swear an oath to any other king or any other lord, nor swear an oath to any other king or any other lord, nor swear an oath to any other king or any other lord, nor swear an oath to any other king or any other lord, nor swear an oath to any other king or any other lord, nor swear an oath to any other king or any other lord, nor swear an oath to any
The gods of the house of Anu and Adad of the house of Sîn, the great gods, my lords, who go at my side,
1 talent, ... mina, for ... ;
in all 6 witnesses from Arbailayu;
in all 4 minas of copper ... of the ... ring, ... of gold ...
The king, my lord, should ask the governor of Arrapha whether there is any barley (here) for the pack animals.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord!
the month of the city god ...
who ...
... I will make the foundation of your throne as secure as a mountain.
... they are going
He said: "I will not give ...
The people of the land of Akkad ...
The money is paid completely. That woman is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Ešarra, “House of the life of the land”: the house of the king of the gods, the lord of lords.
the king, my lord, ...
If the king, my lord, commands, I will bring the rest of the tribute and deliver it to the king, my lord.
... the 'path' is present...
... Bel-tarsi-iluma ...
... and to the son of Yakin ...
The 'well-being' is present. The 'path' on the left of the gall bladder is present.
The 29th day, when the god is seen with the sun, is the day of the watch.
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-ila'i. Good health to the king, my lord!
The king, my lord, knows that I am a dead dog. I have no life. I have no house. I have no field. I have no orchard. I have no people. I have no servant. I have no maid. I have no cook. I have no cooker. I have no cooker-house-man. I have no cooker-house-man-man.
2 cuts of shoulder; 2 cuts of ribs;
Month of the goddess Ištar, twenty-fifth day, eponymy of the city Šaḫuppa (645).
... Sennacherib ...
Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, ...
The breast-bone is thick.
1 ditto of Ubru-Harran, servant of Ahu-uṣur;
... from this day, the ... th day of this month, Iyyar (II), of this year, to the ... th day of Sivan (III) of this year,
... I mustered ... I marched to the land Bīt-Daganna. I brought out ... , the city rulers of the land Bīt-Daganna, ... , the city rulers of the land Bīt-Zamāni, ... , the city rulers of the land Bīt-Amukāni, ... , the city rulers of the land Bīt-Šaʾalli, ... , the city rulers of the land Bīt-Barrû, ... , the city rulers of the land Bīt-Zatti,
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
3 scrotums, 5 bellies;
Witness Šarru-lu-dari.
In a favorable month, (on) an auspicious day, I (re)laid its foundation(s) and (thereby) secured its brickwork. I (re)built (it) from top to bottom and restored its weakened portions. I deposited my monumental inscription. I anointed with oil the monumental inscription of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, my forefather, made an offering, (and) returned (it) to its place.
in the city ...
shall place 10 mina of refined silver (and) one mina of pure gold in the lap of Mullissu, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
a total of 1 horse and 3 mules, 31 horses and mules in all, have come in today.
with the land of Akkad ...
Witness NN, scribe of the prince.
(As for) the one who alters my inscription or my name, may the god Aššur, the great lord, the father of the gods, the one who decrees fates, make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the land.
... -nuri, son of Bel-lu-balaṭ, ... of the city of ... , servant of Šamšī-Adad, ... of the city of ... , servant of Šamšī-Adad, ... of the city of ... , servant of Šamšī-Adad, ... of the city of ... , servant of Šamšī-Adad, ... of the city of ... , servant of Šamšī-Adad, ... of the city of ... , servant of Šamšī-Adad, ... of the city of ... , servant of Šam
... this ...
... -buni, goldsmith;
The gods of the house of Anu and Adad of the New Palace.
I made that city Bīt-Kilamzaḫ a fortress again, strengthened its walls more than before, and settled therein the people of the lands that I had conquered. I brought down from the mountains the people of the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians who had fled from my weapons and I made (them) dwell in the cities Ḫardišpu (and) Bīt-Kubatti.
... to the king, my lord
The servants of these men are servants of the crown prince. They are servants of the crown prince. They are servants of the crown prince. They are servants of the crown prince. They are servants of the crown prince.
2 minas of silver, capital,
and ... the Hagaranu ...
of the town of ...
17 homers of barley;
Witness Tabalayu, ditto.
I made those cities and districts (part of) the province of the city Tuʾimme, and (then) I settled therein the people of the lands that I had conquered. I placed them under the authority of a eunuch of mine, the governor of the city Arrapḫa.
All the days of the year.
... in the presence of the king, my lord ...
The king, my lord, should ask the chief tailor and the chief cupbearer whether or not they have been negligent in their duty.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. Good health to the king, my lord!
I brought Dunānu, son of Bēl-iqīša, out of that city alive and I brought him to Nineveh, my capital city. I placed a representative (of mine) over the people of the city and (then) imposed upon them tax and corvée.
... , the city Ḫarḫar, the city Ḫarḫar, the city Ḫarḫar, the city Ḫarḫar, the city Ḫarḫar, the city Ḫarḫar, the city Ḫarḫar, the city Ḫarḫar, the city Ḫarḫar, the city Ḫarḫar, the city Ḫarḫar, the city Ḫarḫar, the city Ḫ
The god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons prevail over all (my) enemies.
... I made ...
... Abi-...
... of the house of ...
In the course of my campaign, I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Bīt-Daganna, Joppa, Azuru, ... , Ḫirimmu, ... , Ḫirimmu, ... , Ḫirimmu, ... , Ḫirimmu, ... , Ḫirimmu, ... , Ḫirimmu, ... , Ḫirimmu, ... , Ḫirimmu, ... , Ḫirimmu, ... ,
... the god
the sons of Nabû-šezib ...
... the bow which is upon ...
Witness Ubru-abu.
... the month of ...
Witness Bahî.
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, and (then) brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummah, fortified cities, together with the district of the land Bīt-Barrû, and I added (this area) to the territory of Assyria. I placed them under the authority of a eunuch
When the king, my lord, sent me to the Palace of ... , I stayed in the city of ... , in the house of the magnates, for three days and three nights.
— Saturn stands in the halo of the moon.
If a star stands in the halo of the moon: a reign of long days.
Nabû-kabti-ahhe, servant of Marduk-šarru-uṣur and Nabû-šumu-iddina, servant of Marduk-šarru-uṣur, have come to me, saying: "The king of Assyria has sent us to you."
... red, of the port;
The god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and
The vertebrae are recessed. The coils of the colon are ... in number...
I am now waiting for the gods Aššur, Adad, and Ištar. I shall then come and see the king, my lord. I shall also speak with the king, my lord, whatever news there is.
and you place an eating-bowl ...
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of Aššur-belu-uṣur. He has made me his dog, and I have become his dog. I have no house of my own.
Witness ...
The king, my lord, can be glad.
to the district of ...
As to what you wrote to me: "The gods of the king, my lord, know that the gods of the king, my lord, have been angry with us" — the gods of the king, my lord, have now relented and become reconciled with you. The gods of the king, my lord, have now remembered you and your good deeds. May the gods of the king, my lord, grant you happiness and physical well-being.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nammir. Good health to the king, my lord!
At that time, the temple of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, which Tukultī-Ninurta (I), son of Shalmaneser (I), son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also son of Shalmaneser (I), had built had become dilapidated and I removed its ruined portions.
If in the month of your watch Jupiter stands in the halo of the moon: the gods will have mercy on the land.
and ...
... what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
To the king, my lord: your servant Balasî. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Witness Nabû-eriba, ditto ditto.
Witness Apladad-dan.
you shall not ...
The vertebrae are recessed.
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Šamaš-da’’inanni.
On the 1st of Nisan (I), the day that the goddess Ištar rises and takes up her residence in the Akitu House,
Seal of Adad-ahu-uṣur, owner of the people being sold.
He has contracted and bought them from Dadî for x minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
... words ...
the ...
A tablet of Ašipâ to the Palace Superintendent, his lord. Good health to my lord!
The ... which they throw ... , is the ... of Anu ... which they throw ...
... Mannu-ki-...
... I made the city ... and the land Ellipi ... I conquered and destroyed. I brought out ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... ,
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... the ... of the city of ... , the ... of the city of ... , the ... of the city of ... , the ... of the city of ... , the ... of the city of ... , the ... of the city of ... , the ... of the city of ... , the ... of the city of ... , the ... of the city of ... , the ... of the city of ... , the ... of the city of ... , the ... of the city of ... , the ... of the city of ... , the ... of the city of ... , the
Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, has contracted and bought them from these gentlemen for 15 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish. The money is paid completely. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The palace herald has written to me from the Palace: "The king, my lord, has ordered that the people of the city of Akkad be exempt from taxes."
... of my lord ...
I am now waiting for the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
... I settled them in their abandoned ... I divided that land in two and placed two of my officials over them as governors. I imposed upon them tax and corvée just as for Assyria.
The city Samarra.
I have now sent my messenger to Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II) regarding these matters. He has set out and gone to see him. When he returns, I shall immediately write to the king, my lord.
... the king, my lord,
If Jupiter is bright: the land will become happy; the gods will remember Akkad favorably; ...
If Venus becomes visible in Sivan (III): the land will eat abundant food.
in all 7 of NN, ...
in all 6 women;
... the king, my lord,
of the king ...
... I did not go ...
Witness Qurdi-... , mayor of Nineveh.
to ...
... let him come ...
Now, if you should sin against my goodness, may the god Aššur, the great lord, the father of the gods, the one who decrees fates, the one who resides in Eḫursaggalkurkurra, the great lord, the father of the gods, the one who decrees fates, the one who resides in Eḫursaggula, the great lord, the father of the gods, the one who decrees fates, the one who resides in Eḫursaggula, the great lord, the father of the gods, the one who decrees f
The king, my lord, knows that the Itu'eans are in the service of the chief eunuch. They are in the service of the chief eunuch because of the Itu'eans.
... I will not go outdoors.
The 'well-being' is present.
NN and his people, Dadî and his people,
The palace herald has written to me: "The king, my lord, should ask the ... of the palace herald."
In the course of my campaign, I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Bīt-Daganna, Joppa, Banayabarqa, Azuru, (and) Azuru-kabti, the cities of Ṣidqâ that had not submitted to me quickly.
... wine ...
The land of the Palace Herald is well.
... s of ... of his house
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the king, my lord. I have no house of my own. I have no servant or maid. I have no one to take care of the household of the king, my lord. I have no one to take care of the horses of the king, my lord. I have no one to take care of the mules of the king, my lord. I have no one to take care of the donkeys of the king, my lord. I have no one to take care of the camels of the king, my lord. I have no one to take
... I sent ...
in the ...
... I brought out ... and I counted (them) as booty. I brought out the rest of the people, the sons of the king, my lord, and the rest of the people of the land Elam, who were not guilty of (any) sin or crime, and I counted (them) as booty. I brought out the rest of the people of the land Elam, who were not guilty of (any) sin or crime, and I counted (them) as booty. I brought out the rest of the people of the land Elam, who were not guilty of (any)
... the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send me the ... of the magnates until now?" — I have now sent to the king, my lord, the ... of the magnates. The king, my lord, should ask the scribe of the palace whether there is any fault of mine before the king, my lord.
If Jupiter becomes visible in the month Ulūlu: there will be famine in the land; the harvest of the land will not prosper; the king of the land will die.
which he/they ...
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the king. I have no house, no field, no orchard, no well, no spring, no house-garden, no threshing-floor, no well, no spring, no house-garden, no threshing-floor, no well, no spring, no house-garden, no threshing-floor, no well, no spring, no house-garden, no threshing-floor, no well, no spring, no house-garden, no threshing-floor, no well, no
Witness Sasî, cohort commander.
... the upper part and the lower part ...
Concerning the ... about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send ... until now?" —
10 cavalry mounts:
Witness Šep-Aššur, ...
Now then I am waiting for the king, my lord.
If Venus disappears in the east: there will be no rains and floods; the harvest of the land will not prosper; the land will not become happy.
2 oxen, 1 vegetable garden, 1 house —
... ditto ditto ... ;
Now, the king, my lord, should ask the chief tailor and the chief tailor of the city of Arbela whether there are any logs at the city gate of Arbela.
Witness Dannu-ahhe.
... the son of Yakin-Lû ... I brought out ... from that city alive and I counted (them) as booty. I brought out ... , the wife of Dunānu, the son of Bēl-iqīša, a Gambulian, (and) the sons of Bēl-iqīša, the son of Dunānu, a Gambulian, and I counted (them) as booty. I brought out ... , the wife of Dunānu, a Gambulian, and I counted (her) as booty. I
When the king, my lord, sent me to the city of Akkad, I went and stayed in the city of Akkad for one month. I did not see any sign of the enemy there. I returned to the city of Der and stayed there for one month. I did not see any sign of the enemy there either.
Concerning the ... about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why have you not sent an answer to my letter?" —
... and the day ...
Witness Nabû-nadin-šumi.
(As for) Umba-LAGABua, son of Umba-SAGAB, a servant of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), who had fled to the land Elam before the weapons of (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar, my lords, and had grasped the feet of the land Elam, who had brought him out of the land Elam and had made him enter the city Dēr, who had handed him over to the hands of his (own) servants, who
2 ... -garments, the front red, of the port, not;
... the Urarṭian(s) ...
After I had finished the work on my palace, I invited inside it the god Aššur, the great lord, (and) the gods and goddesses living in Assyria, and (then) I made splendid offerings before them and presented (them) with my gifts. I made fine oil from olives and aromatics. At the inauguration of the palace, I had the heads of the subjects of my land drenched (and) I watered their insides with sweet wine.
... I have not heard
The god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons prevail over all (my) enemies. He gave me the just scepter that widens borders (and) he put in my hand a merciless rod to fell enemies. He made all of the rulers bow down at my feet (and) elevated me for shepherding the land and people. He made the great gods bow down at my side (and) allowed me to achieve my heart’s desire. He made all of the black-headed (people) from the Upper Sea
... the king of Elam ...
May Jupiter, the great lord, the lord of the gods, the lord of the lands, the lord of the Igigi gods, the lord of the Anunnaki gods, the lord of the lands, the lord of the lands, the lord of the lands, the lord of the lands, the lord of the lands, the lord of the lands, the lord of the lands, the lord of the lands, the lord of the lands, the lord of the lands, the lord of the lands, the lord of the lands, the lord of the lands, the lord of the lands, the lord of the lands,
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
To the king, my lord: your servant, Illil-bani. Good health to the king, my lord! The land of the king my lord is well.
he ...
total ...
The sons of the king, my lord, are well.
... I sent ... to the king of Babylon. He detained the eunuch of mine whom I had sent (Marduk-šarru-uṣur) and did not give a reply to my word(s).
... and 1/2 'litre';
The king, my lord, knows that the Itu'eans are in the service of the Palace Superintendent. They are servants of the king, my lord.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Witness Nabû-abu-uṣur, ...
Witness Se'-ilu.
the town of Gurrutu ...
... the 'station' is present. The 'path' is present...
NN, servant of servants;
... of the town Ḫimme
... the upper part ...
... words ...
Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, had a stone that he carried from the mountains brought to Nineveh and had (it) placed in the wall of the city Balāṭāya. He had an inscription made of baked clay and he wrote on it the glory of the great lord, my lord, and he placed (it) in the wall of the city Balāṭāya.
... he will not go out ... he will not go out ...
(As for) Iautaʾ, son of Hazael, son of a brother of Uabu, son of a brother of Uabu, son of a brother of Uabu, son of a brother of Uabu, son of a brother of Uabu, son of a brother of Uabu, son of a brother of Uabu, son of a brother of Uabu, son of a brother of Uabu, son of a brother of Uabu, son of a brother of Uabu, son of a brother of Uabu, son of a brother of U
Ditto by all the gods of heaven and earth!
When the goddess Ištar, supreme lady, looks upon this work with pleasure, may a good word for me be set upon her lips! May she make my weapons prevail over all (my) enemies! May she make all of the rulers bow down at my feet! May she make the foundation of my throne as secure as a mountain!
If a star stands in ... : the days of the ruler will end.
300, the Itu'eans;
20 trays of cakes;
... I will not let go until I have brought it.
Witness ... -dari.
1 seah 1 'litre' of regular offering loaves;
And as to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... the Itu'ean ...
I sent the messengers of the land Elam to Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II) and to Tammarītu, the sons of Urtaku, the king of the land Elam, and they brought them to me. I placed them in irons and sent them to Ummanigaš and Tammarītu.
4 ...
... the chief physician of the queen mother ...
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the king.
To the goddess Ištar, his lady: Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of Assyria, dedicated (this) for his life.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, have jumbled the oracle query in my mouth, or changed (or) altered the proceedings, (or that) the oracle query has become jumbled in my mouth...
a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
... his servants
And concerning what I wrote to the Palace: "... the temple of the goddess Ištar ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Mardî. Good health to the king, my lord!
40 minas of copper, capital, fine imposed by the vizier, my lord, at the disposal of the treasurer.
... upon ...
5 ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto ditto
I, Aššur-etel-ilāni-mukīn-apli, king of the universe, son of Sennacherib, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, descendant of the eternal line of Bēl-bāni, son of Adasi, (who was) also king of Assyria, (re)built the temple of the god Aššur, my lord, for the sake of my life (and) the life of my city.
... I have sent ... to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should ask ...
If on the 14th day the moon and sun are seen together: reliable speech; the land will become happy; the gods will remember Akkad favorably; the king of Akkad will become strong and have no rival.
120 sheep, 50 hectares of arable land, a house, threshing floor, garden, grazing land and a well in the town of Zabayu — these are the fields and orchards which the king, my lord, exempted and gave to me.
... for the eyes of the king
silver, ... ,
in the presence ...
... the rams ...
Witness Ahu-lamur, servant of Remanni-Adad.
... the city of Der ... I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered. I brought out ... , ... , oxen, and sheep and goats without number, and I counted (them) as booty.
The palace of Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of Assyria: (slab) belonging to the house of boxwood.
In the future, may a later prince, when that temple becomes dilapidated and he restores (it), restore my monumental inscription and inscribed name to its place. (Then) Aššur will listen to his prayers.
1 duck, 10 turtledoves,
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-dur-paniya. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
From Nabû-šuma-iškun.
The palace of Sargon (II), king of Assyria.
The news of the son of Yakin: he ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
The towns of the Itu'eans and the Itu'eans themselves are well.
The palace of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, descendant of the eternal line of Bēl-bāni, son of Adasi, king of Assyria, descendant of the eternal line of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad — (this is) the audience gift that Karib-il, king of the land Saba, presented to me
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of Nabû-šezib. I have no ... in my house. I have no ... in my house. I have no ... in my house.
Witness Bel-...
I shall do the work.
When Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your creature, sent you to the district of Gambulu to collect a tribute of horses, you seized the city Ḫarutu, together with the district of the city Ḫarutu, and brought them to Assyria. You seized the city Ḫarutu, together with the district of the city Ḫarutu, and brought them to Assyria. You seized the city Ḫarutu, together with the district of the city Ḫarut
The god Aššur, the great mountain, ... the gods Anu and Enlil, the gods of heaven and earth, ... the god Ea, the lord of wisdom, ... the god Sîn, the light of heaven and earth, ... the god Adad, the canal inspector of heaven and earth, ... the god Šamaš, the judge of heaven and earth, ... the god Marduk, the sage of the gods, ... the god Ninurta, the warrior of the gods, ... the god Nusku, the bearer of the holy scepter, ... the god
(As for) the messenger of Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II) who had come to me by the command of the gods Šamaš and Marduk, I sent (him) back to Ummanigaš. I placed Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II), son of Atta-metu, on the throne over the land Elam. I imposed upon him the payment of tribute (and) gifts (in recognition) of my overlordship so that he (now) pulls my yoke.
From Nabû'a of Assur.
... Nergal-eṭir
Witness ... -šarru-uṣur, eunuch.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did you not write (about it)?" — I did write, but I did not know (about it).
Nabû-eriba, ... , 3 sons of his;
Nabû-kenu-uṣur, reporter;
total, 10 ...
Concerning the news of the Itu'eans about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send (word) that they should be seized?" —
If the left of the 'finger' is split: the woman will give birth to twins.
... of the 'path' is present...
Witness Zarutî, scribe.
Witness Ahu-qamu, servant of the chief eunuch.
the 'path' is present ...
The king, my lord, should ask them where the son of Yakin is, and they will tell him.
1 ditto ditto, the edging ditto, knotted, red;
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
The people of the land Ḫimme, who had put their trust in the king of the land Elam, and (whom) the mighty weapons of the god Aššur and the goddess Ištar had felled, (and) had brought about their defeat, now, in order to save their lives, they fled to the land Ḫimme. The governor of the land Raṣappa, the king of the land Ḫimme, the king of the land Elam, the king of the land Assyria, the king of the land Babylon
Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, had the wall of Nineveh built anew and raised as high as a mountain. He had the god Aššur, the great lord, enter inside it and made (him) reside in Ešarra, the inner sanctum of his divinity.
6 'litres' of beer, 6 'litres' of wine;
The king, my lord, should ask (about it).
In the middle of the 'finger' there is a cross-shaped marking. The 'path' on the left of the gall bladder is present.
The king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not write to me for a long time?" Now, if you are alive, write to me!
... my messenger
As to the news of the son of Yakin: he has ... ed from the city of the king, my lord, and gone to the city of Akkad.
I am herewith sending over the ... s of the ... s of the gods ...
This is its interpretation.
Now, if it is agreeable to the king, my lord, let them (= the palace superintendents) do the work.
The gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Nusku, (and) Nergal, the great gods, my lords, decreed a curse, a grievous curse, upon me as my fate.
adjoining the field of Issar-šumu-ereš, adjoining the field of Sin-ereš,
The 6-700 sheep which they brought are at my disposal.
The palace of Sennacherib, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, (and) the one who built the temple of the god Aššur.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "... "
The 28th day, the day of the watch, the day when the god is seen with the sun, is the day when Anu and Enlil were created. The 28th day is the day when the goddess Ištar was created. The 28th day is the day when the god Ea was created. The 28th day is the day when the god Sîn was created. The 28th day is the day when the god Ninurta was created. The 28th day is the day when the god Nusku was created. The
10 shoots of sesame;
The corn taxes of these fields and orchards shall not be collected, the straw taxes shall not be gathered.
From Ašaredu.
I, (for) my life and the well-being of my seed and my land, built a city in the desert and named it Dūr-Šarrukīn. I settled therein the people of the lands that I had conquered. I placed them under the authority of a eunuch of mine, the governor of the city Arrapḫa.
... the king, my lord, wrote to me: "The men of Marduk-šarru-uṣur and Marduk-šarru-uṣur have come to me ...
14 Kushite horses trained to the yoke ...
20,000 stalks of vine near the city of the Hagaranu;
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did you not write (about it)?"
When you are to pour out a libation bowl in the evening, you say: “Nusku, vizier of the gods, accept life!”
1 ... , NN, ... , 1 ... , 1 ... ,
Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, the one who reveres you, the one who is assiduous towards your shrines, the one who is assiduous towards your places (of worship), the one who reveres your great divinity, the one who is assiduous towards your great divinity, the one who is assiduous towards your great divinity, the one who reveres your great divinity, the one who is assiduous towards your great divinity, the one who reveres your great divinity, the one who is assiduous towards your great divinity, the
The village of the chief tailor in the desert — the king should not give it to anyone.
Witness Nabû-ahhe-šullim.
the king, my lord, can be glad.
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, ask him what he has to say.
The god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons prevail over all (my) enemies. He put the insubmissive to flight and made the rulers who sit on (royal) daises bow down at my feet. The goddess Ištar, the lady of battle, placed in my hands a merciless bow (and) an arrow that cuts off life.
the forts ...
... the land of the governor of Arpad
Witness Didî.
2 (of) the) 9-finger (type),
Month Iyyar (II), 15th day, eponym year of Sin-šarra-uṣur.
The city Ubalaṭu, a fortress of Harhar, which the Manneans captured.
... of the land of Akkad ...
the governor of the city of Haurina ...
Fingernail of Abi-ila'i, son of Zabayu, owner of the women being sold.
1 ... , gardener; 1 woman; 1 daughter, weaned: a total of 4 people, servants of Mannu-ki-... —
Witness Puṭi-še.
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), capable shepherd, favorite of the great gods, guardian of truth who loves justice, (i 5) renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the insubmissive, (and) the one who strikes enemies with lightning:
... in the temple of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, I laid its foundation(s) (anew) and (thereby) secured its brickwork.
1,200, of Aššur-eṭir, the palace superintendent of the crown prince;
1, Zazaya;
Witness Šummu-Aššur, ...
... he will say
... this
Witness Se'-ila'i, ditto ditto ditto ditto.
Palace of Amēl-Marduk, king of Babylon, son of Nebuchadnezzar (II), king of Babylon, descendant of Sennacherib, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, descendant of the eternal line of Bēl-bāni, son of Adasi,
News of Assurbanipal, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria: he ...
... I shall do ...
The king, my lord, knows that I am a dead dog. I have no life. I have no  house. I have no field. I have no servant. I have no ox. I have  no sheep. I have no house. I have no field. I have no servant. I have  no ox. I have no sheep. I have no house.
... 1 'litre' of the king's bread;
At that time, the temple of the god Aššur, my lord, which Tukultī-Ninurta (I), son of Shalmaneser (I), son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also son of Shalmaneser (I), had built had become dilapidated and I removed its ruined portions. I (re)built (it) from top to bottom and deposited my monumental inscription. I restored the clay cone of Tukultī-Ninurta (I), son of Shalman
... to the bedspread
... the commander-in-chief ...
The sons of Yakin-Lû, the sons of Yakin-Lû, the sons of Yakin-Lû, the sons of Yakin-Lû, the sons of Yakin-Lû, the sons of Yakin-Lû, the sons of Yakin-Lû, the sons of Yakin-Lû, the sons of Yakin-Lû, the sons of Yakin-Lû, the sons of Yakin-Lû, the sons of Yakin-Lû, the sons of Yakin-L
... to the king, my lord. May the gods of the king, my lord, know that I am a servant of the king, my lord. I have no house, no field, no orchard, no ...
... and ...
... barley and wine
You shall not sin against the treaty of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, concerning Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, concerning whom he has concluded (this) treaty with you, but you shall not sin against the treaty of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, concerning Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, concerning whom he has
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me:
... -iddina, eunuch of the king of Assyria, has contracted and bought it from these gentlemen for x minas of silver.
1 gold ring, 4 minas in weight, 1 mina 5 shekels in weight, 1 mina 4 1/2 shekels in weight, 1 mina 3 1/2 shekels in weight, 1 mina 2 1/2 shekels in weight, 1 mina 1 1/2 shekels in weight, 1 mina 1 1/2 shekels in weight, 1 mina 1 1/2 shekels in weight, 1 mina 1 1
... we shall go to ...
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments...
Witness Apladad-le'i.
1, Nabû-sakip, farmer, and his people; 1, NN, farmer, and his people; 1, NN, farmer, and his people;
Month of Iyyar (II), 12th day.
in the charge of Banaya ...
... the lower part ...
The woman Adad-aplu-iddina, a daughter of the Itu'eans,
... I sent ... to the land of the Lullumu. They brought back to me ... , 1,000 sheep, 1,000 goats, ... , 1,000 oxen, ... , 1,000 ... , ... , 1,000 ... , ... , 1,000 ... , ... , 1,000 ... , ... , 1,000 ... , ... , 1,000 ... , ... , 1,000 ... , ... , 1,000 ...
in the city of Arbela ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, (or) has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šarru-emuranni. Good health to the king, my lord!
From Nergal-eṭir.
... to the king, my lord
4 whole sheep; 100 sheep;
The money is paid completely. That woman is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Ashur-nerari-belu-usur,
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether these men or his sons or his grandsons, seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Zabinu and his sons,
Month Iyyar (II), 28th day, eponym year of Aššur-naṣir.
3 towers, 1 house, 1 ... ,
Witness Nergal-isse'a.
20 turtledoves, the new baths;
... the 'yoke' is present...
... , the son of Yakin, ... , the son of Yakin, ... , the son of Yakin, ... , the son of Yakin, ... , the son of Yakin, ... , the son of Yakin, ... , the son of Yakin, ... , the son of Yakin, ... , the son of Yakin, ... , the son of Yakin, ... , the son of Yakin, ... , the son of Yakin, ... , the son of Yakin, ... , the son of Yakin, ... ,
... the Itu'ean ...
... the xth day;
The city of the king, my lord, is well; the temples are well; the palace is well; the city gate is well; the queen gate is well;
Concerning Nabû-bel-šumate about whom I wrote to the king, my lord, I have now written to him as the king, my lord, commanded. I have also written to the magnates, the governors and the prefects, my lords, as the king, my lord, commanded.
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the governor of Arrapha. The king, my lord, should ask the governor of Arrapha whether I have any men at my disposal.
I ask you Šamaš, great lord, whether ... of the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity ...
NN, son of Haldi-eṭir, servant of Marduk-šarru-uṣur —
This is its interpretation.
... I shall send
If the sky shouts and ...
the lower ...
NN, royal bodyguard of the queen mother;
... as the son of the god Bēl (Marduk)
who to ...
The king, my lord, knows that the land of Akkad is not submissive to me.
Witness Nabû-eriba, servant of the chief tailor.
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the king. I do not know how to do anything. The king, my lord, should ask the servants of the king.
Witness Zabinu, servant of the ...
in all 1 son of Nabû-šallim;
The 'well-being' is present.
... when ...
... or the ...
For the god Marduk, his lord: Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of Assyria, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also king of Assyria, (re)built the temple of the god Marduk, his lord, for the sake of his life (and) the life of his city.
Month of Shebat (XI), 6th day, eponym year of Bel-Harran-belu-uṣur.
To the king, my lord: your servant PN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
an estate of ... adjoining the field of ... —
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether ... the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity ...
in the presence of my lord ...
Yasubaya, ... , son of the ... , servant of Aqru, son of Aqru, servant of the ... , servant of the chief cupbearer, son of Aqru, servant of the chief cupbearer,
NN, farmer, and his people;
Nabû-šezib, servant of Dannî ...
Son of Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad —
the king, your father, ...
Abi-ila'i;
... to Nabû
The 4th of Nisan (I), the 10th of Elul (VI), the 14th of Tishri (VII), the 16th of Shebat (XI), the 18th of Shebat (XI), the 20th of Shebat (XI), the 22nd of Shebat (XI), the 24th of Shebat (XI), the 26th of Shebat (XI), the 28th of Shebat (XI), the 30th of Shebat (X
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), offspring of Esarhaddon, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, descendant of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria —
... I am now waiting for the king, my lord. Who is this ... ?
I shall send ...
I have sent two messengers to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should ask them where the king, my lord, sent me. They know where the king, my lord, sent me.
Concerning the news of the king, my lord, which I heard from the servant of the king, my lord,
If the moon and sun are in opposition: the king of the land will widen his understanding; the foundation of the throne of the land will become stable.
... from Urda-...
In my eighth regnal year, I marched to the land Ḫatti (Syria-Palestine). I conquered the cities Carchemish, Ḫarutu, (and) Tursana.
When the son of Yakin-Lû came to me, I sent my messenger to him, saying: "Come, let me see you!" He said: "I will not come without a surety." I said: "I will come and see you." He said: "I will not come without a surety."
... not ...
... days
2 talents, the 'residences' of the scribes;
4 minas of silver, capital, fine imposed by the vizier, my lord, at the disposal of Zabayu, son of Aya-rame, son of Haldi-ereš.
If in Shebat (XI) it rains: the land will become reduced.
Seal of Marduk-... ,
Concerning the matter which you wrote to me about, I have now written to the Palace ...
writing-board ...
Whoever in the future, at any time, breaks the contract shall place one mina of refined silver (and) one mina of pure gold in the lap of Mullissu, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Marduk-...
Witness Tabnî.
Concerning the king of Elam about whom I wrote to the king, my lord: "He has set out and is on his way to Assyria" — he has now turned around and is on his way to Elam. He has heard about the advance of my army and has become frightened.
The land of the king, my lord, is well; the forts of the king, my lord, are well; the ... of the king, my lord, are well; the ... of the king, my lord, are well; the ... of the king, my lord, are well; the ... of the king, my lord, are well; the ... of the king, my lord, are well; the ... of the king, my lord, are well; the ... of the king, my lord, are well; the ... of the king, my lord, are well; the ... of the king, my
The month of Nisan (I), the twenty-second day, eponymy of Ilī-ṭārissina (696).
Concerning ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
On my second campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me and I marched to the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians, a dangerous enemy who since time immemorial had not submitted to the yoke of the kings, my ancestors. In the high mountains, difficult terrain, I rode on horseback. In very rugged terrain I roamed about on foot like a wild bull.
The king, my lord, should ask ...
The city-lords of the land of Akkad have come to me, saying: "The king, our lord, has ordered us to bring the tribute to Nippur." Now, if the king, our lord, commands, we will bring the tribute to Nippur. If the king, our lord, commands otherwise, we will bring the tribute to the city of Dilbat.
which in my presence ...
The messenger of the king, my lord, who brought me the sealed document which I sent to the king, my lord,
Witness Barruqu, ditto.
and ...
... he will make
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
... they say
... the servant of the deputy (governor)
an estate of 40 hectares of land;
The 17th day: joy of heart.
8, the female singers;
Now ...
... of the king to the son of Yakin
1 ox, 100 sheep ...
8 ... -vessels of ... ;
Witness Didaya.
... the king, my lord ...
Witness Aššur-šumu-uṣur.
... the land of the Qutu ... I conquered and destroyed their cities. I brought their people to Assyria. I conquered the land of the Lullumu ... I brought their people to Assyria. I conquered the land of the Papḫu ... I brought their people to Assyria. I conquered the land of the Šubaru ... I brought their people to Assyria. I conquered the land of the Yasubigallians ... I brought their people to Assyria.
to ...
If at the appearance of the moon one horn passes the other: the king of Akkad will die; the king of Elam will die.
... of the house of NN
... his face ...
the city of Akkuddu ...
... all ...
The palace of Ashurbanipal, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of Assyria.
Now, if it is agreeable to the king, my lord, ... I will send ...
Moreover, (as for) Ṣidqâ, the king of the city Ashkelon who had not bowed down to my yoke, I forcibly removed the gods of his father’s house, himself, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his brothers, (and other) offspring of his father’s house and took him to Assyria. (ii 1) I placed (the god) Aššur, my lord, over the people of his land and (thereby) made them bow down at my feet. I imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep,
What is it that the king, my lord, commands? ...
From Balasî.
The city of Bel-iqiša, which Mannu-ki-Arbail had destroyed, has been rebuilt by the command of the god Aššur and the goddess Mullissu.
The palace herald, my lord, should not say: "Why did you not write (about it)?"
... a 2-seah jar of beer;
... the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... the king, my lord, wrote to me: '... the palace superintendent ... the palace superintendent ... the palace superintendent ... the palace superintendent ... the palace superintendent ... the palace superintendent ... the palace superintendent ... the palace superintendent ... the palace superintendent ... the palace superintendent ... the palace superintendent ... the palace superintendent ... the palace superintendent ... the palace superintendent ... the palace superintendent ... the palace superintendent ... the palace superintendent ... the
... the gods of the king, my lord, have been very attentive to the king, my lord.
The palace herald and the chief eunuch have come to me, saying: "The king has ordered us to bring the king's daughter into the presence of the king." We are now waiting for the king's daughter.
we shall give ...
The king, my lord, should ask Mannu-ki-Arbail about the news of the Urarṭian. He has set out from Waisi and is on his way to the city Tušḫa.
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhe.
... son of the king ...
Adad-nerari (III),
I sent (this order) and they searched for him in Barhalzi, but could not find him. They went to the city of Tillê, his home town, but again to no avail; he had fled to the city of Raʾil. They seized the city of Raʾil and brought it to me. They killed the city-lords of Raʾil and the city-lords of Barhalzi and they hung their corpseses on poles around the city. They brought me the city-lords of Barhalzi and the city-lords of Raʾil.
... Witness Qurdi-...
Witness Eṭiru, priest of Ninurta.
The palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of Assyria: (slab) belonging to the house of boxwood.
... and when ...
... the land of the king, my lord, ...
... your ...
to 5 minas, 1 1/2 shekels, NN;
I have sent my messenger to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
Nergal-... , son of ... , servant of Šamši-Adad.
and (whether) they will instigate an insurrection and rebellion against him, or act with evil intent against him.
An estate of x hectares of land adjoining the field of Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra;
in accordance with the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord, and your favorable decisions, should the subject of this query, Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, strive and plan?
Sin-balassu-iqbi, ... ;
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... of your days
Witness Zar-Issar.
If Jupiter and Venus are bright and their horns are very dark: the days of the ruler will end; there will be hostilities; the gods will abandon the land; the king of the land will die; the days of the ruler will end; there will be hostilities.
To the king, my lord: your servant Inurta-belu-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord!
... I have sent ... to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should ask ...
Witness Se'-dalâ, treasurer.
to do ...
... the palace of the chief ...
Month of Iyyar (II), 6th day, eponym year of ...
... the house of Anu-kadru-uṣur
Witness Nabû-eṭir-napšati, tailor.
1 vineyard of the chief physician;
16 in all, 20 in all, 24 in all, ...
Witness Nergal-šarru-uṣur, scribe.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nadin-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
The palace of Adad-nārārī, king of Assyria, son of Arik-dīn-ili, king of Assyria, son of Enlil-nārārī (who was) also king of Assyria:
3 black horses,
The land of Akkad, the temple of the goddess Ištar, the great lady, the queen of the gods, the lady of the lands, the one who resides in the city Arbela, the great lady, my lady, ...
The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... of the land of Akkad ... the city ... their ...
Seal of Se'-manani, owner of the woman being sold.
The palace superintendent whom the king, my lord, sent to me, has come to me, saying: "The king has sent me to you."
When the city-lord of Arrapha came to me, I sent my messenger to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should ask him where the men are. He knows that they are not in the city.
Month Iyyar (II), 22nd day, eponym year of Nabû-šar-ahhe, governor of Samaria (645).
... Ariye ...
... to the city of ... in the district of the land of Mannea ...
6 minas, NN, son of Haldi-... , ... of the chief ... ;
From Adad-šumu-uṣur.
... the governor ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nammir. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
He has taken it as a loan. It shall increase by a fourth.
... I have not seen ...
Bel-... , his wife, two sons of his, his daughter, and two maids of his, a total of 5 persons, servants of these men —
2 ditto ditto ... ;
The priest of Aššur, the priest of Mullissu, the priest of Mašmaš, the priest of Ninurta, the priest of Gula, the priest of Ištar of Nineveh, the priest of Ištar of Arbela, the priest of Nergal, the priest of Laṣ, the priest of ... , the priest of ... , the priest of ... , the priest of ... , the priest of ... , the priest of ... , the priest of ... , the priest of ... , the priest of ... , the priest of ... , the priest of ... , the priest
... of the bedspread
40 male sheep belonging to Ahi-qamu,
... the palace herald
The 21st day, when the god is seen with the sun, is the day of the watch.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
600, 700, the city of Šiddi-hiriti;
80,000 (homers) of arable land ... 30,000 (homers) of fallow ...
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
... s of the city of Haurina
If the moon is dark in Iyyar (II) and the sun rises in Sivan (III): there will be deaths; the king of Akkad will die; the cattle of Akkad will lie in the steppe undisturbed.
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Month of the 24th day, 5th stage.
They are saying: "He will die."
... ḫumayu, son of Bel-eṭir, ...
... the god Marduk, the great lord, the one who loves me, ... I mustered the workmen of the gods Šamaš and Marduk and ... I made (them) take up hoe(s and) ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I
... in the presence of the king, my lord ...
I made that city Bīt-Kilamzaḫ a fortress again, strengthened its walls more than before, and settled therein the people of the lands that I had conquered. I brought down from the mountains the people of the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians who had fled from my weapons and I made (them) dwell in the cities Ḫardišpu (and) Bīt-Kubatti.
The city Ḫarutu.
The god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons prevail over all (my) enemies. He put in the hands of the goddess Ištar, the lady of battle, the one who slaughterss the settlements of the rebellious and insubmissive, the one who makes the unsubmissive bow down, the one who makes the proud fall, the one who makes the strong weak, the one who makes the weak strong, the one who makes the strong weak, the one who makes the weak strong, the one who makes the
Nabû-bel-šumate,
The city rulers of the land Ḫatti (Syria-Palestine), the land Sūḫu including the land Rapiqu, the land Ḫatti (Syria-Palestine), the land Sūḫu including the land Rapiqu, the land Ḫatti (Syria-Palestine), the land Sūḫu including the land Rapiqu, the land Ḫatti (Syria-Palestine), the land Sūḫu including the land Rapiqu, the land Ḫatti (Syria-Palestine),
Nabû-... , son of Harammu, ...
Witness Šulmu-ahhe.
6 minas of silver belonging to Remanni-Adad, at the disposal of Zabinu.
in all 10, NN;
Witness Nanî.
... the 'hand' of Nanaya
To the king, my lord: your servant Ululayu. Good health to the king, my lord! Assyria is well, the temples are well, all the king's forts are well, the king, my lord, is well, may the king, my lord, be well!
... the land ...
... of Nabû-duru-uṣur
I shall send ...
much ...
... I ... to the city Aššur ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ... I ...
5 maids,
The ... of the king, my lord, ... to the city of Huzirina ... the city of Huzirina ... the city of Huzirina ... the city of Huzirina ... the city of Huzirina ... the city of Huzirina ... the city of Huzirina ... the city of Huzirina ... the city of Huzirina ... the city of Huzirina ... the city of Huzirina ... the city of Huzirina ... the city of Huzirina ... the city of Huzirina ... the city of Huz
... the god Enlil
The day that he saw the troops he set out.
The king, my lord, knows that the day is advanced. Let them (= the magnates) do the work and deliver it to me.
Witness ... -ahhe.
the city of Kar-Apladad, ...
The king, my lord, knows that the gods of the house of Anu and Adad are very angry with the house of Anu and Adad. May the king, my lord, not abandon me!
Witness Nabû-šumu-... , scribe of the chief physician.
... I will do
... of ...
... Nabû-šumu-iškun ...
... the left of the gall bladder is attached. The base of the 'finger' ...
... Aššur-šallimanni
Moreover, (as for) the city rulers of the land Ḫatti (Syria-Palestine), who had not submitted to my yoke, I now sent (them) a message of peace and (then) they bowed down at my feet. (As for) the city rulers of the land Ḫatti (Syria-Palestine), who had not submitted to my yoke, I now imposed forcible labor upon them. I took hostages from them and imposed upon them corvée (and) brick-making. I imposed upon them (the same
the gods ...
in all 15 temples,
If the moon and sun are in balance: the king of the land will widen his understanding.
The city Ḫarḫar.
Seal of Sasî, owner of the man being sold.
in accordance with what the king, my lord, wrote to me ...
... I mustered ... and ... I took the road to the land Ḫimme. I conquered the cities ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , ... ,
the land Muṣri ...
From Urad-Gula.
Month of Ḫarrān, eponymy of Adad-šārru-uṣur, governor of the city Samaria (645).
all ...
in accordance with what the king, my lord, ...
Witness Ubru-Nabû, son of Zabinu.
The gods Aššur, Adad, and Ištar-kudnittu will listen to the prayers of a later prince when that temple becomes dilapidated and he rebuilds (it). May (the same prince) restore my clay cone to its place.
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-belu-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord!
The temple of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, which Sennacherib, king of Assyria, had built had buckled and its walls had buckled. I removed its buckled parts. I built (and) completed (it) from top to bottom (and) deposited my monumental inscription.
Witness Ṭuraya.
Now the king, my lord, should ask ... whether there is any ... in the city of Akkad.
... the temple of the goddess Ištar ...
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Šamaš-kašid-ayabi.
Witness ... , servant of Bel-lu-dari.
Now ...
If the moon at its appearance stands low and becomes visible: the land will become happy; the gods will remember Akkad favorably.
555 sheep, 500 sheep, inspected,
(Property) of Šamaš-rēša-uṣur, king of the world, king of Assyria.
Palace of Sennacherib, king of Assyria: (slab) belonging to the house of the (... ) dragon(s) of the wall of the city Dūr-Šarrukīn. Whoever erases my inscribed name (or) places (it) in the service of a god (or another) person, may the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Nusku, (
... in the city of Der
On the 9th of Nisan (I), when you are to strew salt on ... , you say: “May the gods of heaven and earth accept and listen!”
an estate of 1 hectare 5 decares adjoining the road of the goddess Ištar;
28 (items): heavy (and) light copper spears, heavy copper spearheads, heavy copper spearheads with inlays of gold, heavy copper spearheads with inlays of silver, heavy copper spearheads with inlays of copper, heavy copper spearheads with inlays of tin, heavy copper spearheads with inlays of lead, heavy copper spearheads with inlays of ... , heavy copper spearheads with inlays of ... , heavy copper spearheads with inlays of ... , heavy copper spearheads with inlays of ...
in all 6: the 'residences' of ...
... the town of Huzirina
On my first campaign, I brought about the defeat of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), king of Karduniaš (Babylonia), together with the troops of (the land) Elam, his allies, in the plain of Kish. In the midst of that battle he abandoned his camp, fled alone, and (thereby) saved his life. I seized the chariots, horses, wagons, (and) mules that he had abandoned in the midst of battle.
to Il-...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-deni-epuš. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
... there is a hole. The 'strength' is missing.
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-matka-da''in. Good health to the king, my lord!
4 minas of silver, 3 togas, 3 tunics, tribute: the chief tailor;
with me ...
... here ...
10 ... of ... , belonging to Bar-... , at the disposal of ...
... of the palace
Month of Ulūlu, twenty-first day, eponymy of Mannu-ki-Aššur.
He is my lord. I ...
... I sent ... to the city ... , saying: "... the city of ... and the city of ... I will destroy ... and I will destroy ... I will destroy ... and I will destroy ... I will destroy ... and I will destroy ... I will destroy ... and I will destroy ...
... the city of Kar-Šamaš
the god ...
When he has eaten the bread and drunk the wine, he says: “... ”
Concerning the messenger of the king, my lord, who is in my presence, I have sent him to the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
... we shall do
... 20 ...
... of Assyria ...
The god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons prevail over all (my) enemies. He put in the hands of the people of his land (the ability) to speak (and) to reason, (and) gave them the ability to make decisions.
On my second campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me and I marched to the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians, a dangerous enemy who since time immemorial had not submitted to the yoke of the kings, my ancestors. In the high mountains, difficult terrain, I rode on horseback. In very rugged terrain I roamed about on foot like a wild bull. In very rugged terrain I roamed about on foot like a wild bull.
Witness Haldi-remanni, chariot driver.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
... upon ...
Witness Aššur-...
The palace herald and the chief treasurer have come to me, saying: "The palace herald and the chief treasurer are coming to you."
(As to) the news of the son of Yakin: he has set out from Bit-Dakuri and is on his way to the king, my lord.
In the course of my campaign, I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Bīt-Daganna, Joppa, Azuru, (and) Azuru-Kabti, the cities of Ṣidqâ that had not submitted to me quickly.
... I have not ...
... I mustered the workmen of the gods Šamaš and Marduk and they (the gods) commanded me to ... the city Ḫarḫar. I mustered the workmen of the gods Šamaš and Marduk and they (the gods) commanded me to ... the city Ḫarḫar. I mustered the workmen of the gods Šamaš and Marduk and they (the gods) commanded me to ... the city Ḫarḫar.
I have now written to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should do as he finds appropriate. May the gods of heaven and earth bless the king, my lord!
4 oxen, 1,000 sheep ...
Witness Se'-dalâ, horse trainer.
... years
The king, my lord, should ask the scribe of the palace superintendent whether there is any barley in the storehouse of the palace superintendent. If there is, the king, my lord, should order that it be given to the men of the palace superintendent.
From Rašil, servant of the king.
total, the village of Hulmu;
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... to the god ...
190 ...
I, Ashurbanipal, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, the one who carries out to perfection (5) the rites of Ešarra, the one who (re)confirmed the offerings of the great gods, the one who (re)settled Babylon, the one who (re)built Esagil and Babylon, the one who (re)confirmed the regular offerings of the great gods, the one who (re)confirmed the rites of E
When the king, my lord, sent me to the land of Akkad, I was staying in the city of Der. The king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not come to the city of Der?"
Month of Shebat (XI), 7th day, eponym year of Dananu.
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur.
When ...
(was) the son of Bel-dan, son of Aššur-rabi (I), son of Aššur-rabi (II), son of Aššur-rabi (III), son of Aššur-rabi (IV), son of Aššur-rabi (V), son of Aššur-rabi (VI), son of Aššur-rabi (VII), son of Aššur-rabi (VIII), son of Aššur-rabi (IX), son of Aššur-r
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
We are building the palace. The king, my lord, can be glad.
Concerning the news of the king, my lord, which the magnates have been telling me, I have now written to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should do as he finds appropriate.
... of my army
The tribute of the land of the Kummeans.
not to go out ...
Shalmaneser, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (I), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of the god Aššur:
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or touched anything unclean, (or) changed or altered the proceedings, (or that) the oracle query has become jumbled and faulty in my mouth...
... the Itu'eans ...
... I made ... bow down at my feet (and) ... I placed ... eunuchs of mine as provincial governors over them. I ... the land Bīt-Ḫumria (Israel) and the land Bīt-Zamāni (Syria) ... I ... the land Ḫatti (Syria-Palestine).
Seal of Aššur-iddina, cohort commander, son of Na'di-ilu, from the town of the Hagaranu.
the work of the king, my lord, ...
... their ... s and their boats ...
... the king ...
The governor of ... has written to me: "The king, my lord, should know that the men of the city-lords of Borsippa are coming to me."
... in the middle of ...
Disregard that ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send ... until now?" —
Your servant Nabû-bel-šumate: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: I have sent my messenger to greet the king, the horses and the mules.
Now, if it is agreeable to the king, my lord, let them (= the magnates) be ordered to bring the tribute.
... of ...
When Aššur-bēl-nišēšu, son of Adad-nārārī (I), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Arik-dīn-ili, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Enlil-nārārī (who was) also vice-regent of the god Aššur:
To the king, my lord: your servant PN. Good health to the king, my lord!
x hectares of land in the town of Hagaranu, adjoining the field of Aplî, the field of Zabinu, and the field of Aplî —
In the eighth year, when the king, my lord, had commanded the renovation of Babylon, I was appointed therein as the city overseer. I have been working therein since the king, my lord, commanded it.
... the king, my lord,
Witness Balassu, scribe.
... the upper part and the lower part are equal ...
of ...
... I did not send ...
The messenger of the son of Yakin ...
Month ... , 1st day, eponym year of Sin-šarra-uṣur.
(As for) Uaiteʾ (Iautaʾ), son of Hazael, son of a brother of Uaiteʾ, son of a brother of Hazael, son of a brother of Hazael, son of a brother of Hazael, son of a brother of Hazael, son of a brother of Hazael, son of a brother of Hazael, son of a brother of Hazael, son of a brother of Hazael, son of a brother of Hazael, son of a brother of Hazael, son of a brother of Hazael, son of a brother of Hazael, son of a
When the god Aššur, the great lord, the father of the gods, the one who decrees fates, the one who makes opposing forces agree, the one who resides in Eḫursaggalkurkurra, the great lord, the father of the gods, the one who decrees fates, the one who makes opposing forces agree, the one who resides in Eḫursaggula, the great lord, the father of the gods, the one who decrees fates, the one who makes opposing forces agree, the one who resides in Eḫursaggula
in the temple of the god ...
... this ...
they say
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
May the gods of the king, my lord, know that I am a dog of the king, my lord! May the gods of the king, my lord, know that I am a dog of the king, my lord! May the gods of the king, my lord, know that I am a dog of the king, my lord! May the gods of the king, my lord, know that I am a dog of the king, my lord!
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether these men or his sons or his grandsons, seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Aššur-nerari-uṣur and his sons, shall place one mina of refined silver (and) one mina of pure gold in the lap of Mullissu, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Your servant Na'di-ilu: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
Concerning the ...
... there is ...
The king, my lord, should ask the crown prince ...
In the future, at any time, whether Ubru-Nanaya or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or his prefect or his governor or his mayor or his ... ,
The month of ... , ... th day, eponymy of ... , governor of the land of ... (696).
... Now to ...
to ...
10 trays of ... ,
... the upper part and the lower part are equal ...
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether Zabayu or his sons, seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Bel-dan, his sons and his grandsons,
Witness Nabû-nuri, ...
Now, Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, has sent Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the scribe of his palace, to Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the scribe of his city, to serve him.
... I will give
Witness NN, scribe.
To Aššur-iddina, his lord: Sargon (II), king of the world, presented (this object).
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-eṭiranni. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
to your divinity, Šamaš, great lord, and to your divinity ...
41 in all from the town of Tillê;
... s, x persons;
I shall send ...
To the governor, my lord: your servant Nabû-damiq. Good health to my lord!
... I shall give ...
... Now, if it is agreeable to the king, my lord, ...
Witness NN, scribe.
I am now waiting for the men of the Palace Superintendent. When they come, I shall  immediately set out and go to the Palace. I shall return and bring the men of the  Palace Superintendent with me.
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
To the god Aššur, his lord: Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, viceroy of Ur (and) Eridu, dedicated (this) for his life.
(As for) the sons of Ahu-ila'i, son of Bel-duri, son of Ahu-uqur, son of Ahu-uqur, son of Ahu-uqur, son of Ahu-uqur, son of Ahu-uqur, son of Ahu-uqur, son of Ahu-uqur, son of Ahu-uqur, son of Ahu-uqur, son of Ahu-uqur, son of Ahu-uqur, son of Ahu-uqur
... to the king, my lord ...
The servants of the governor of Arrapha who were with me have been arrested and are in the presence of the governor of Arrapha. I have sent them to the Palace. The king, my lord, should ask them why they were arrested.
(As for) the city Ḫirimmu, which is in the district of the Brook of Egypt, (and) which Šamšī-Adad (V), king of Assyria, had conquered and whose site was too small; (and) which had become weak and whose walls had buckled, I removed its ruined portions. I (then) enlarged its structure by 100 large cubits along (its) longer side and 80 large cubits along (its) shorter side and (thus) made its site bigger.
... s in the house of ...
... the king, my lord,
... I did
Nabû-kenu-uṣur,
... the king, my lord ...
to NN ...
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: reliable speech; the land will become happy; the gods will remember Akkad favorably.
Witness ... -isse'a, son of Zabî.
... the goddess Ištar ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ...
1, the son of the chief ... ;
... of Nergal-dan, son of Hari-abu
Witness Abi-lešir, ditto.
I conquered the city Ḫirimmu, together with its district, which is in the environs of the city Ḫarutu. I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire their cities.
Ashur-nerari-kumu'a,
all that ...
1, Izbu;
... in the town of the Hagaranu ...
It shall increase by a fourth.
Witness Aššur-...
Nergal-ila'i, ... of the chief tailor;
The palace herald and the chief eunuch have come to me, saying: "The king has ordered us to bring the king's daughter into the presence of the king." We are now bringing the king's daughter into the presence of the king.
... I made (them) take the road to Assyria. I put to the sword the people of the land Ḫilakku, a dangerous enemy, and I did not leave one alive.
The ... which I sent to the king, my lord, ...
Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of Assyria, descendant of Arik-dīn-ili, king of Assyria, son of Enlil-nārārī (who was) also king of Assyria, descendant of Aššur-uballiṭ (I) (who was) also king of Assyria:
Your servant Nabû-deni-epuš: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
Month of Sivan (III), 3rd day, eponym year of Sin-šarra-uṣur.
Witness ... -zeru-... , ... of the queen.
6 2-seah jars of beer;
The gods Ninurta and Adad will listen to the prayers of a later prince when that temple becomes dilapidated and he rebuilds (it). May (the same prince) restore my clay cone to its place. (Then) Aššur and the god Adad will listen to his prayers.
When ... , the son of Yakin, came to me, I sent him to the Palace.
At that time, the temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, my mistress, which Shalmaneser (III), son of Ashurnasirpal (II), son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), son of Adad-nārārī (II) (and) son of Arik-dīn-ili, son of Enlil-nārārī, son of Aššur-uballiṭ (II) (and) son of Erība-Adad (II), had built — that
... the city of Der ... I built ... I completed ... I made ... I built ... I made ... I built ... I made ... I made ... I made ...
... "
... 22 shekels of silver, the ... of the cohort commander;
Witness Remanni-Adad, ditto.
from Dur-Šarrukku ...
3, the 'residences' of the 'path' of the lower leg;
Concerning Nabû-šezib ...
Witness Nergal-šarru-uṣur, 'third man'.
... in the hands of the treasurer
Palace of Sennacherib, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, descendant of Tiglath-pileser (II), king of Assyria, descendant of Aššur-rēša-iši (II) (who was) also king of Assyria.
2 star-shaped ornaments of the base of two quivers, upon a setting of a braid of gold;
In the course of my campaign ... I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the city ...
(As for) Uabu, son of Bel-šarru-uṣur, a city ruler of the Medes, who had not bowed down to the yoke of my lordship, I forcibly removed the gods of his father’s house, himself, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his brothers, (and other) offspring of his father’s house and took him to Assyria. I placed (an official) over his city and (thereby) made (it) bow down to the yoke of my lordship.
... they are saying: "If the king, our lord, commands, we will bring the ... and the men."
Nergal-šarru-ibni ...
Now, may the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
3 ... ;
He shall give the silver back on the first day of Nisan (I).
1, the prefect of the 'coiffured women';
When you are to strew salt on cooked meat before the gods, you say: “May the gods of heaven and earth accept and listen!”
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
The king, my lord, should ask the palace superintendent whether they have been brought in or not. If they have not been brought in, let them be brought in from the Inner City.
Witness Pan-Ashur-lamur.
... the 'hand' of god ...
The temple of the goddess Ištar of Uruk, which Šamšī-Adad (V), king of Assyria, son of Shalmaneser (III), king of Assyria, had built had buckled and become weak. I removed its buckled and weakened parts. I built (and) completed (it) from top to bottom (and) deposited my monumental inscription.
Witness Nabû-eriba, deputy of the team-commander.
You shall not make common cause with Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, nor swear an oath to him, nor swear an oath to his sons, nor swear an oath to his grandsons, nor swear an oath to his brothers, nor swear an oath to his nephews, nor swear an oath to his prefect, nor swear an oath to his governor, nor swear an oath to his mayor, nor swear an oath to his city-overseer, nor swear an oath to his city-overseer's son, nor swear an o
The goddess Ištar, supreme lady, looked steadfastly upon me among all of the rulers and made me pre-eminent in the land where I was created. She put in my hand a merciless rod to fell enemies.
The money is paid completely. That house and field are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
From this day, the 10th day of this month, Iyyar (II), of this year, to the 9th day of Sivan (III) of this year, 30 days and nights, my stipulated term —
Disregard that they (= the Ionians) are in the city ...
Witness Balassu-...
which he/they ...
I have not seen any sign yet.
... of the temples, the palaces and the fortresses
... and gold ...
An estate of 4 decares of field in the town of ...
The temple of the goddess Ištar of Uruk, which ... the king, my lord, had built, had buckled and become weak.
... I made ... and ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ...
The 11th day he set out.
1 ditto, the woman Dilil-Aya;
If he appoints him, is it pleasing to your great divinity? Is it acceptable to your great divinity?
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Mannu-ki-... , ... of the New Palace.
If the sun stands in the halo of the moon: there will be truth in the land, and the son will speak the truth with his father; universal peace.
3 2-seah jars of hinhinu-seeds;
his sons ...
... as the son of the king ...
Month of Shebat (XI), 1st day, eponym year of Aššur-lamur.
1, the goddess Ištar of Uruk, who loves me;
... the eclipse which took place ...
... his ...
The son of Yakin-Lû, the son of Aššur-bēl-nišēšu, the son of Aššur-rabi (I), the son of Aššur-rabi (II), the son of Aššur-rabi (III), the son of Aššur-rabi (IV), the son of Aššur-rabi (V), the son of Aššur-rabi (VI), the son of Aššur-rabi (VII), the son of Aššur-
Witness Natan.
I am now waiting for the king, my lord. If the king, my lord, commands, I will go and bring the logs across the river. If the king, my lord, commands, I will also bring across the logs which are in the city of Bit-Daganna. The logs which are in the city of Bit-Daganna are 100 in number.
I am now sending off the messenger of mine whom I sent to the Palace.
... to ...
Month of Sivan (III), 18th day.
The barley rations which they give to the palace heralds and the chief treasurer:
... of the land of Akkad ... the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send me the ... of the land of Akkad?" Now then I am sending to the king, my lord, the ... of the land of Akkad which I captured. The king, my lord, should ask the chief eunuch whether there is any barley (here) for the king, my lord.
1 ditto of sesame;
... ditto ditto ... ;
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
... adjoining the road that leads to the village of ...
... my ...
This is its interpretation.
... I will not go outdoors.
I have now sent my messenger to the Palace. When he returns to me, I shall immediately write to the king, my lord.
May Nabû and Marduk bless the crown prince, my lord!
May the goddess Ištar, supreme lady, look upon this work with pleasure and may a good word for me be set upon her lips!
total, 4 ...
... in my presence ...
adjoining the field of Aplî,
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. Good health to the king, my lord!
The land of the king, my lord, is well; the forts of the king, my lord, are well; the king, my lord, can be glad.
... the Itu'eans ... I sent my messenger to Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II) regarding these matters. He detained the eunuch of mine whom I had sent (Marduk-šarru-uṣur) and did not give a reply to my word(s). He detained the messenger of mine whom I had sent (Marduk-šarru-uṣur) and did not give a reply to my word(s). He detained the eunuch of mine whom I had sent (Marduk-šar
Now ...
6 ditto of wine; 1 ditto of olives;
Concerning the governors and the magnates of the king, my lord, who are with me, I have sent them to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, ask them whether they are servants of the king, my lord.
1, the father of the son of Zeru-ibni;
... he says ...
2 homers, 5 seahs, Nabû-ereš;
To the governor, my lord: your servant Nabû-naṣir. Good health to my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless my lord!
... of the land Ḫimme ... I conquered the cities Ḫirimmu (and) Ḫarutu (and) carried off their people. I conquered the cities Bīt-Daganna, Joppa, ... , Ḫirimmu, Ḫarutu, (and) Azuru and destroyed their settlements.
35 homers of barley, the regular offering of the chief eunuch;
of 1,300 ...
1 mina, Nabû-... ;
40, the 'residences' of the 'paths';
The men of the king, my lord, who are in the service of the city-lords of Arrapha, have been sold for money to the Itu'eans. They are now slaves of the Itu'eans. They are not in the service of the city-lords of Arrapha.
To my lord: your servant Nabû-nammir. Good health to my lord!
Witness Ilu-taklak.
300 sheep, 40 hectares of arable land in the town of Hari-Aššur, assigned to Aššur-eṭir.
... we are doing
... the 'hand' of god ...
The temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, which Shalmaneser (III), king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also king of Assyria, had built — that temple had buckled and become weak.
To the king, my lord: your servant Šulmu-beli. Good health to the king, my lord!
Balaṭu,
the whole ...
Witness Zababa-eriba, 'third man'.
in ...
... to the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, ...
Aššur-nārārī, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Išme-Dagan (II) (who was) also vice-regent of the god Aššur:
... the front ...
... the farmer ...
... care of Rihanu.
... the month of Sivan (III) ...
... in their presence
... the governor
... s, their ...
The palace herald has contracted and bought them from these gentlemen for 10 minas of silver.
... this temple
... the land of Akkad
... of Nabû-šarra-uṣur ...
... the land of Nairi ... Aššur-rabi (I), king of Assyria, the father who had engendered me, ... the kings, my ancestors ...
When the king, my lord, ... to the city of Akkad,
... this ...
... to the son of Yakin
1 grove of poplars;
I have written to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should do as he deems best.
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, and (then) brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummah, fortified cities, together with the small cities in their environs (and) the district of the land Bīt-Barrû in its entirety, and I added (this area) to the territory of
The city Ḫarḫar.
If a star stands in the halo of the moon: the king of Akkad will exercise complete dominion.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
... of the ... of the magnates
... I do not know
... the land of Akkad
... of the land of Akkad
a cup of ... ,
... to the king, my lord ...
... Yasubu
10 shekels of silver belonging to Apladad-šimanni, at the disposal of the vizier.
... ayu, reporter;
Month of Aššur, eponymy of Ša-Nabû-šû, governor of the city Samaria (645).
10 minas of silver ...
... the goddess Ištar ... the land of Akkad ... the month ... the month ...
... the city of Der ... the land of the Yasubigallians ...
... the king, my lord ...
Witness Haldi-nuri, horse trainer of the cupbearer.
I have now written down the names of the cities which he destroyed and am herewith sending them to the king, my lord.
The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void. The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... Sîn-šallim-ahhe ...
of the son of Yakin ...
... in the middle of the sky, in the middle of the earth, in the middle of the sea, in the middle of the mountains ...
in the days of ...
... I made the palace beautiful.
I made that city Bīt-Kilamzaḫ a fortress again, strengthened its walls more than before, and settled therein the people of the lands that I had conquered. I placed them under the authority of a eunuch of mine, the governor of the city Arrapḫa.
the watch which he keeps ...
From Nabû-iqbi.
... , NN, Bel-dan, a total of 4 persons, servants of these men —
... all that I ...
... -ilu, his servant
Witness Aššur-le'i, ditto ditto.
Issar-... ,
Total, of the palace superintendent, of the household of Aššur-da''inanni, in the city of Kar-Tukulti-Ninurta. The king, my lord, should know (this).
Nabû-eriba;
... Se'-abu-...
In Sippar, Nippur, Babylon, Borsippa, Cutha, Kish, Dilbat, (and) Uruk,
Of the wedding night of Mullissu — of the month of Ab (V).
the chariot ...
... I shall write
... the king, my lord
... Now then
... of the king ...
1 cloak, the ... ;
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
Samsi-ibni, the ...
I am now waiting for the messenger of Bel-dan, and when he comes, I shall immediately write to the king, my lord.
... temple ...
In the eponymy of Aššur-gimilli-tere, king of Assyria, the son of Tiglath-pileser (III), king of Assyria, the son of Aššur-rēša-iši (III), king of Assyria, the son of Aššur-rabi (III) (who was) also king of Assyria, I marched to the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians. I conquered the cities Bīt-Kubatti
I have written to the Palace: "... the ... s of the Palace should come and ... to the Inner City." The king, my lord, should do as he finds appropriate.
... seahs, 8 'litres';
In the course of my campaign, I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Bīt-Daganna, Joppa, Azuru, (and) Azuru-Kabti, the cities of Ṣidqâ that had not submitted to me quickly. I brought out of them 20,000 people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty.
Disregard that ...
The palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of Assyria: (slab) belonging to the house of boxwood.
I shall go ...
I have now written to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should do as he finds appropriate. I have written to the king, my lord, in accordance with the command of the great lord, Marduk.
In the month of Iyyar (II), on the 4th day, the day when the god is seen with the sun,
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
... the king, my lord, ...
the house of my father ...
... the palace ... I built ... I built ... I built ... I built ... I built ... I built ... I built ... I built ... I built ... I built ... I built ... I built ... I built ... I built ... I built ... I built ... I built ...
... to the land of Akkad
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did you not write (about it)?" — I did write to the king, my lord, but I did not know that the king, my lord, had not yet returned from the Palace. Now that the king, my lord, has returned, I am herewith sending the letter to the king, my lord.
... watch ...
In the middle of the middle surface of the 'finger' there is a cross-shaped marking.
... of the land of Akkad, which Aššur-rēša-iši (I) had built and which had buckled.
The king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send the men of the magnates with me?" Now, if the king, my lord, commands, I will send the men of the magnates with the king, my lord. If the king, my lord, commands otherwise, I will send the men of the magnates with the king, my lord.
Witness Nabû-šumu-uṣur, chariot driver.
... I have written ...
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
in all 585 sheep, 7 mules —
Palace of Amēl-Marduk, king of Babylon, son of Nebuchadnezzar (II), king of Babylon, descendant of Sennacherib, king of Assyria.
Should Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, appoint the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the position which is written in this papyrus?
If Venus is red: the land will become happy.
The messengers of the Mannean king have come to me, saying: "The king of Assyria has sent us to you." I have sent them back to the Mannean king, my lord.
I shall not give ...
14 ... ;
Nabû-šarru-uṣur,
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, scribe.
... I sent ... to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should ask him whether he has not been negligent about the ... of the king, my lord. He has not been negligent about the ... of the king, my lord.
Now, if it is agreeable to the king, my lord, let them (= the magnates) do the work and deliver it to me.
He who is present shall pay in full the silver in the centre of Nineveh.
8 litres ...
The gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, and Nergal, the great gods, my lords, ...
The new baths:
... I mustered ... and ... I marched to the land Ḫimme. I conquered the cities Ḫirimmu, Ḫarutu, (and) Ḫarutu-ša-Zabayu. I carried off the people living in those cities and brought (them) to my city Aššur. I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire their cities.
the land of Akkad ...
After I had finished the work on my palace, I invited inside it the god Aššur, the great lord, (and) the gods and goddesses living in Assyria, and (then) I made splendid offerings before them and presented (them) with my gifts. I made fine oil from olives and aromatics. At the inauguration of the palace, I had the heads of the subjects of my land drenched (and) I watered their insides with sweet wine. I had the heads of the subjects of my land drenched (and) I watered
Concerning the ... s of the house of Bel-lu-balaṭ about whom you wrote to me, I have sent them to you.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
The people of the cities Bīt-Daganna, Joppa, ... , Bīt-Zitti, Ṣarepta, Maḫalliba, ... , Bīt-Aḫlam, ... , Bīt-Daganna, ... , Bīt-Zitti, ... , Bīt-Aḫlam, ... , Bīt-Daganna, ... , Bīt-Zitti, ... , Maḫalliba, ... , Bīt-Aḫlam, ... , Bīt-Daganna, ... , B
Se'-sakâ;
... of this year the king ...
Witness Mannu-ki-Arbail, ...
... this ...
If the moon and sun are in opposition: the king of the land will widen his understanding. — On the 14th day the moon will be seen with the sun.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether these men or his sons or his grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Remanni-Adad and his sons,
Witness Nabû-šallim.
you ...
I am now waiting for the king, my lord. Whoever the king, my lord, commands, let him come and settle the case between me and Mannu-ki-Arbail. If he commands, I will go and settle it with him in the king's presence.
from the town of ...
who ... the god Aššur, the great lord, ... the god Adad, the canal inspector of heaven and earth, ... the god Ea, the lord of wisdom, ... the god Sîn, the light of heaven and earth, ... the god Šamaš, the judge of heaven and earth, ... the goddess Ištar, the queen of heaven and earth, ... the goddess Nanāya, the spouse of the god Enlil, ... the goddess Ištar-kudnittu, the lady of battle, ... the goddess Ištar-nē
The 17th day, when the king goes down to the House of God.
... the moon will complete the day in Shebat (XI); on the 14th day it will be seen with the sun.
To the king of the lands, my lord: your servant, Illil-bani. May Enlil, Ninurta, and Nusku bless the king of the lands, my lord.
... Marduk-šarru-uṣur ...
... of the river ...
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
The messenger of the king, my lord, has come to me, saying: "I have brought you 300 sheep and 300 sheep from the palace."
the scribe.
... he will go
I have now written to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should do as he finds appropriate. If it is agreeable to the king, my lord, let them (= the magnates) be summoned and I will speak with them. If not, let them be summoned and I will speak with them in the king my lord's presence.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
in all 1, Nabû-na'di, son of Nabû-šulmu-ukin;
Disregard that the day is advanced ...
the men ...
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
... Ištar ...
Nabû-šezib, ... ;
Seal of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, son of Aya-abu, owner of the vineyard being sold.
If Venus disappears in the east in the month of ... : there will be an eclipse of the sun; the king of Akkad will die.
If in Sivan (III) the sun stands in the halo of the moon: there will be truth in the land; the son will speak the truth with his father; the king will speak the truth with his subjects.
... we are making.
The money is paid completely. That woman is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
(and) the son of Haldi-abu-uṣur, son of 1 woman, a total of 3 persons, servants of ... —
The gods Anu and Enlil, the great gods, my lords, commanded me to (re)build Esagil and Babylon, to renovate the shrines of all cult centers, and to (re)confirm the regular offerings for the great gods.
If the earth quakes: the enemy will fall in battle.
300 tubes;
Witness ...
before ...
... Now ...
... the royal bodyguard ...
If on the 14th day the moon and sun are seen together: reliable speech; the land will become happy; the gods will remember Akkad favorably; the king will become happy; the cattle of Akkad will lie in the steppe undisturbed.
If Venus becomes visible in the month of Aries: there will be an eclipse of the sun.
they are not in your country ...
... his people
May the gods of heaven and earth bless you, may they grant you happiness and physical well-being!
10 hectares in the town of ...
Sal-sagab, servant of his;
... to the city of Akkuddu
— Jupiter stands in the halo of the moon.
From Bulluṭu.
Nergal-dan, servant of Aššur-le'i —
... in a pronouncement ...
and ...
In the future, at any time, whether these men or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or his prefect or his governor or his mayor or his city-lord or his ... ,
... of field which is cultivated, a threshing-floor, a well, ...
2 baskets of garlic; 1 baskets of leeks;
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or touched anything unclean, (or) changed or altered the proceedings, (or that) the oracle query has become jumbled and faulty in my mouth...
Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Shalmaneser (I) (who was) also king of Assyria: booty of the land Ḫatti. Shalmaneser (I), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also vice-regent of the god Aššur, built the temple of the god Aššur, his lord, for his life and the life of his city.
The palace of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, descendant of the eternal line of Bēl-bāni, son of Adasi, founder of the city Qār-Tukultī-Ninurta, (and) descendant of the eternal line of Ninurta-kudurrī-uṣur, son of Erišum (I), (who was) also king of Assyria: (slab
... the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send me the news of the son of Yakin until now?" — I have now sent the news of the son of Yakin to the king, my lord.
Town of Arbailayu, son of Il-remanni.
... Eṭiru ...
The man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity ...
The 3rd day ...
Month of Tebet (X), 22nd day, eponym year of Aššur-da''inanni.
Month ... , 8th day, eponym year of Aššur-lākīnu-ubāša.
in all 88 men ...
Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of Assyria: (v 1) I built the temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh for my life and the life of my city. I made (it) as bright as day and made (it) shine like the sun. I made (it) as secure as a mountain and made (it) as bright as day. I made (
Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
The palace herald has written to me from the Palace: "The palace herald has written to the king, my lord: the king, my lord, should send word that the city lords of the land of Akkad be arrested and brought to me."
If the top of the 'finger' is split: the enemy will attack the vanguard of my army.
... I will speak ...
1 ditto of 1 1/2 litre; 1 seah 6 litres of refined oil;
... their ...
... to the river ...
The king, my lord, should ask ... the governor of ...
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, have jumbled the oracle query in my mouth, or changed (or) altered the proceedings...
and the lower part ...
... as much as
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ahhe-eriba. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
1 ... -garment ... ;
... as
Now, if it is agreeable to the king, my lord, let them ... and bring it.
The king, my lord, should ask the ... s of the city of ... whether there is any barley (here) for the pack animals.
Witness Banba, son of Urda-Nanaya.
... 6th day, 5th day, 6th day, 7th day, 8th day, 9th day, 10th day, 11th day, 12th day, 13th day, 14th day, 15th day, 16th day, 17th day, 18th day, 19th day, 20th day, 21st day, 22nd day, 23rd day, 24th day, 25th day,
I, Aššur-etel-ilāni-mukīn-apli, ... , son of Sennacherib, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, descendant of the eternal line of Bēl-bāni, son of Adasi, ... , descendant of the eternal line of Bēl-bāni, son of Adasi, ... , descendant of the eternal line of Bēl-bāni, son of Adasi, ... , descendant of the eternal line of Bēl
To the king, my lord: your servant Šarru-emuranni. Good health to the king, my lord!
... the king of Assyria
Balasî ...
and the star of Nabû-eṭir ...
Witness ...
... the king, my lord,
Witness Ibašši-ilani.
... of copper
of the king, my lord ...
(As for) Umba-LAGABua, the Gambulian (king), who had not bowed down to the yoke of my lordship, I forcibly removed the gods of his father’s house, himself, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his brothers, (and other) offspring of his father’s house and took him to Assyria.
(As for) Iakīn-Lû, the king of the land Arwad, who lives in the wide sea, who had not bowed down to the yoke of the kings, my ancestors, (and) who did not fear their lordship, (v 1) bowed down to do obeisance to me. He brought his daughter, with a substantial dowry, to serve as a housekeeper, to Nineveh, before me. He beseeched my lordly majesty and (then) he made an appeal to my lordly majesty. He sent his daughter,
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Bel-dan or his sons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Zabinu,
The sons of the king have been very much in the city of Akkad. They have been living there for the past two years. They have not set foot anywhere else. They have not even gone to the palace in Nippur. They have not left Akkad.
... 3 ...
Emašmaš, “House, place of destiny”: the house of Belat-ekalli.
Concerning the crown prince's visit to the Palace Superintendent, about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let the crown prince enter the palace on the 10th of Nisan (I)" —
20 hectares of land of the governor of Arpad;
... of the land of Akkad
To the king, my lord: your servant PN. Good health to the king, my lord!
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "... "
... his ... his ... his ... his ...
... of the water's flow
Ešarra-hamatua, the temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, which had buckled and become weak:
... to the palace ...
Concerning the king, my lord, I have sent three messengers to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should ask them where the men are. If the men are in the king's presence, let the king, my lord, ask the men where the men are. If the men are not in the king's presence, let the king, my lord, ask the men where the men are.
I have written to the Palace. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
which in the palace of the king ...
Adad-nerari (III),
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
From Rašil the older, servant of the king.
total, of the woman Nabû-šarru-uṣur;
total 1,000 — the city of Tillê;
until ...
... I am ... of the king ...
total, the town of Dannaya ...
... of silver upon a ... base ...
... upon the king, my lord
From Balasî.
... to the king
... I will give.
1 writing-board ...
The herald of the chief cook.
When the king sent me to the land of Akkad, I stayed in the city of Der. I received tribute from the city of Der and from the city of Kullimmeri.
... I built ... and I made (it) resplendent. I made (it) an object of wonder for all of the people.
the rites of ...
... of the king, my lord, ...
... he has been appointed ...
The lower part ...
The 5th day, when Aššur rises, is when he vanquished Anu.
When the king, my lord, sent me to Elam, I saw the king of Elam, who had become frightened of the king, my lord, and had gone to the city Dēr.
... upon
Concerning the news of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, concerning which you wrote to me: "He has set out from the city of Calah and gone to the city of Tilmun" —
The gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Nergal, (and) Nusku, the great gods, my lords, who support me, rendered a just verdict for me concerning Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II) and Tammarītu. Tammarītu rebelled against him and struck him, together with his family, down with the sword in the midst of the land Elam
Witness Aššur-reṣuwa, treasurer of the queen mother.
... this ...
... I am herewith sending to the king, my lord, whatever the king, my lord, commands.
... of this year ...
of/which ...
Witness Šamaš-kašid-ayabi.
It shall increase by a fourth.
and Nabû-šezib ...
Nabû-šezib, the singer whom the king, my lord, sent to me, has come with 30 men.
the messenger of the ...
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the chief treasurer. I have no house in Nineveh. I have no servant in Nineveh.
... the New House ...
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
When ... , the son of the king, my lord, came to the Palace, I did not see him. Now let him come and see me.
When ... , the temple scribe of the god Šamaš, came to me in the city of Der, I sent him to the king, my lord.
The chariot which goes before Nabû ...
NN, farmer, and his people; ... , farmer, and his people;
Witness Zarutî, cohort commander.
Marduk-šumu-iddina,
... the magnates of the king
Witness Abi-ramu. Witness ...
I tore down that palace in its entirety, (and then) I changed the course of the Tebilti River and directed its outflow.
The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Month of Tishri (VII), ... th day, eponym year of Nabû-nadin-ahi.
Nabû-šezib, son of Nabû-duru-uṣur, servant of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan);
The gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, and Nergal, the great gods, my lords,
Witness Aplî.
The son of Yakin-Lû ... has come to me, saying: "...
Witness Qurdi-Issar, village manager.
Now then I am sending him to the vizier, my lord.
Concerning the ... about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send ... until now?" — ... I have now sent ...
... of the Hagaranu
all the days that I have lived ...
... and when he saw me
10 ...
... Witness Haldî, ...
... days
Ditto by Ištar of Arbela and Ištar of Nineveh!
For the goddess Ištar, his lady: Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, king of the four quarters (of the world), (re)built the temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh for the sake of his life (and) the life of his city. He (re)built Esagil and Babylon from top to bottom and restored the rites (and) rituals.
Witness Nabû-turṣani, ditto.
The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The messenger of the king, my lord, has come to me, saying: "The king of Assyria has sent a message to you ...
Mannu-lemin, ditto; Nabû-le'i, ditto;
Witness Abi-ila'i, porter.
1 duck, 10 turtledoves, 10 doves,
... 20 trays of cakes ...
The palace herald ... the ... of the queen mother ... the city of ...
2 ditto ditto ... ;
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Nergal, (and) Nusku, the great gods, my lords, who support me, rendered a just verdict for me concerning Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II) and Tammarītu. Tammarītu rebelled against him and struck him, together with his family, down with the sword. Tammarītu sat on the
Nabû-na'di, the sons of Sin-šarra-uṣur and Nabû-šuma-iddina, the sons of Nabû-šuma-iddina, the sons of Nabû-šuma-iddina, the sons of Nabû-šuma-iddina, the sons of Nabû-šuma-iddina, the sons of Nabû-šuma-iddina, the sons of Nabû-šuma-iddina, the sons of Nabû-šuma-iddina, the sons of Nabû
Bel-dan,
Witness ... Witness Barruqu.
I have written to the Palace ...
Witness Qurî.
all to ...
Concerning the palace herald ...
On the 1st day, Bel-ila'i will die.
total, 100+x minas, assigned to Aššur-ila'i.
which you ...
The people of the country of Akkad are happy.
The king, my lord, should ask ...
a golden necklace, a golden diadem on his head, ... , his servants,
I have written to the Palace ...
Nabû-eṭir-napšati,
I did not see any silver.
in all 23 horses,
Month Ab (V), 16th day, eponym year of ...
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the king, my lord. I have no house, no field, no orchard, no ...
... the men of Na'di-Inurta ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-šumu-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord!
The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number. Check-up...
(As for) the city rulers of the land Ḫatti (Syria-Palestine), who had not bowed down to the yoke of the kings, my ancestors, and who had not sent their sons to serve as housekeepers in the palace of Assyria, (v 1) now bowed down to do obeisance to me and (now) they send their sons to serve as housekeepers in the palace of Assyria. I imposed upon Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan) a heavy punishment
If he appoints him, is it pleasing to your great divinity? Is it acceptable to your great divinity?
1, Izbu, ditto;
In the course of my campaign, I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Bīt-Daganna, Joppa, ... , Azuru, ... , Ḫirimmu, ... , (and) Abdi-Liʾti, a city of the king of the land Elam.
... , the singer;
... in this year
Concerning the news of the son of Yakin: He has set out from the king, my lord's presence, and is on his way to the city of Akkad.
40 baskets ...
The king, my lord, should ask the chief eunuch.
Nabû-šumu-iddina, deputy scribe;
May the gods of the house of Dagan bless the crown prince, my lord!
... to my lord
... the palace of Tukultī-Ninurta ...
which he/they ...
... I shall do ...
... 20
Concerning the people of the house of my father about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me:
I made the goddess Ištar, supreme lady, look upon this work with pleasure and may she bestow long days, well-being and joy upon me!
I am herewith sending off the king, my lord's men to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should ask them where the men are. They are in the town of the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should ask them where the men are.
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, mayor.
The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Witness NN, ... of the city of Nineveh.
... May the goddess Ištar look upon this work with pleasure!
If the Pleiades enter the moon and come out: the land will become happy; the gods will remember Akkad favorably; the king of Akkad will become strong and have no rival.
... the 'hand' of ...
their boats ...
... Aššur-šarru-uṣur
To the king, my lord: your servant Mannu-ki-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord!
... not ...
Concerning the news of Bel-iddina, the king, my lord, should ask the ... s of the city ...
Witness NN, 'third man'.
20 sheep of the king, my lord, which I gave to the  shepherds of the city of Arrapha — they have not given them. They  have appropriated them for themselves. They are not giving them to the shepherds of the city of Arrapha. They are selling them for money to the merchants of the city of Arrapha.
Ditto, ditto; may they (= all the gods) make you, your brothers and your sons go backward like a caterpillar.
to the king, my lord ...
... not ...
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Sagab (651).
the new bath ...
Seal of Abi-... ,
Nabû-zeru-lešir;
... the day that I see
I am now waiting for them; when they have returned, I shall immediately come and see the king, my lord.
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
... the town of Bit-Daganna
the singer whom his father ...
1, Marduk-aplu-... , Witness Ba... ,
... this ...
The messenger of the Itu'eans has come to me in the city of Arbela, saying: "The Itu'eans are in the city of Arbela."
The palace herald and the chief eunuch have come and told me: "The king has ordered the release of the city gate." I am waiting for them; when they come, I shall release the city gate.
... we shall speak with him ... and we shall bring him to the king, our lord.
Disregard that ... to the king of the lands, my lord ...
... the land of Akkad ...
Your servant Na'di-ilu: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
If the moon becomes visible in Sivan (III) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
Witness Nabû-na'di, horse trainer of the palace herald.
The woman Aya-amu, servant of these men —
I sent (this order) and they (= the palace superintendents) brought me ... , saying: "He is in the town of Zabinu." They ... ed him to the town of Zabinu and ... ed him to the town of Zabinu.
(As for) Umba-LAGABua, the ... of the city Elam, who had come to the aid of Šamaš-šuma-ukīn — (my) unfaithful brother — and had sent his troops to ... , the troops of the god Aššur, my lord, defeated him. Umba-LAGabua, the ... of the city Elam, ... his troops ... his ... his ... his ... his ... his ... his ... his ... his ... his ... his ... his ... his ... his ... his ... his ... his ... his ... his
Sîn-duru-uṣur, eunuch of the queen mother;
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
... the palace superintendent and the palace herald ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
I made that palace beautiful. To be an object of wonder for all of the people, I raised the superstructure of the entire palace. I called it the “Palace Without a Rival.”
the 'well-being' is present ...
... the fort ...
1 duck, 10 turtledoves, ... the king ...
Witness Taklak-il.
1 prayer bowl ditto;
And concerning the news of the king of Elam, he has crossed the river and has set on the bridge. His magnates are with him. He himself is going to the city Bubilu.
... as the king commanded ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
The messenger of the son of Yakin-Lû has come to me, saying: "The son of Yakin-Lû is in the presence of Aššur-nerari-kumu'a; he has not yet set out."
I have sent (word) and they are bringing the rest of the tribute. The tribute which they bring is the regular offering of the temple of Dagan. The king, my lord, should know (this).
5 whole sheep; 10 sheep of the temple;
I am now sending to the king, my lord, the son of Yakin-Lû, a servant of the king, my lord, who has been held fast in my presence, together with his mother. Let the king, my lord, ask him whether he is a servant of the king, my lord.
Tukulti-Ninurta, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (I) (who was) also king of Assyria:
Month Iyyar (II), 18th day, eponym year of Kanunayu, governor of the New Palace.
The king, my lord, knows that I am a poor man. I have no house, no field, no orchard, no well, no threshing-floor, no grove, no spring, no well, no threshing-floor, no grove, no spring, no well, no threshing-floor, no grove, no spring, no well, no threshing-floor, no grove, no spring, no well, no threshing-floor, no grove, no spring, no well, no threshing-floor, no grove, no spring
On my first campaign, I brought about the defeat of Aššur-lēʾi, son of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), together with the troops of (the land) Elam, his allies, in the plain of Kish. In the midst of that battle he abandoned his camp, fled alone, and (thereby) saved his life. I seized the chariots, horses, wagons, (and) mules that he had abandoned in the thick of battle. I cut off the head of Aššur-
... I will do
Month of the god Sîn, twenty-fifth year of the god Adad.
Witness Bel-abu'a.
1 ... , ... of the chief ... , who ... in ... ;
6 loaves; 1 seah of beer;
The king, my lord, should ask them where the rest of the logs are. They are 1,000 in number.
The king, my lord, knows that the silver is paid completely. That field and house are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
At that time, the temple of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, which Shalmaneser (III), son of Ashurnasirpal (II), son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), son of Adad-nārārī (II) (and) son of Arik-dīn-ili, son of Enlil-nārārī, son of Aššur-uballiṭ (II) (and) son of Erība-Adad (II), son of Aššur-n
... the Babylonians ...
The palace herald has written to me from the Palace: "The king, my lord, should ask the scribe of the palace."
I have written to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should do as he finds appropriate.
he is my servant ...
Witness NN, royal bodyguard.
to Nabû-...
... the gods of the king, my lord, ... the king, my lord, ...
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur, eunuch.
The ... which I/he/they ... I/he/they ... the king, my lord, ...
The boats which they towed ...
The god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons prevail over all (my) enemies. He made all of the black-headed (people) bow down at my feet (and) elevated me for shepherding the land and people.
The king, my lord, should ask the scribes of the palace whether they have been negligent.
On the 6th of Nisan (I), I set out from the Inner City and went to Dur-Šarrukku. I shall be in the Inner City on the 10th of Nisan (I).
... the land of ... I conquered ... I carried off ... I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire ... I captured ... I conquered ... I captured ... I conquered ... I captured ... I conquered ... I captured ... I conquered ... I captured ... I captured ... I captured ...
Witness ...
I am now waiting for their rearguard. When they have returned, I shall immediately write to the Palace.
It shall increase by a fourth.
Concerning the news of the king, my lord, I have sent a detailed report to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should do as he finds appropriate.
If the sky shouts ...
The son of Yakin-Lû, son of Aḫšēri, son of Ikūnum, son of Erišum-Marduk, son of Zakūtu, son of Puzur-Aššur, son of Aššur-nārārī, son of Išme-Dagan (II), son of Aššur-rabi (II), son of Aššur-uballiṭ (II), son of Erība-Adad (II), son of Aššur-nārār
I made twenty-one statues of myself in the form of a warrior, with a ferocious look, (and) I erected (them) in the gateway(s) of Egallammes, the temple of the god Nergal of the city Tarbiṣu. I made (them) hold the door bolts of Egallammes.
Seal of Nabû-kabti-ahhe, scribe.
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, (or) has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean...
The 'hand' of Nanaya is placed on the 'increment.'
... of the goddess Ištar of Uruk, which he/they ...
2,000 ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-šumu-ukin. Good health to the king, my lord!
a 2-seah jar of hinhinu-seeds;
The land of the king, my lord, is well; the forts are well; the king, my lord, can be glad.
Mannu-ki-...
from the beginning ...
... he has said: "...
... his ...
... to my lord
The king, my lord, should ask the scribe of the Inner City.
... of this year
1 sheep, 1 bowl of wine, 1 mina of silver, capital, fine imposed by the vizier, at the disposal of the village-manager of the town of Hada'il.
... son of Anu
The king, my lord, knows that the gods of the king, my lord, have been angry with me. Now, if the king, my lord, commands, I will go and worship the gods of the king, my lord.
In the future, at any time, whether Aššur-nerari-uṣur or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or his prefect or his governor or his mayor or his city-lord or his mayor or his prefect or his nephew or his brother or his nephew or his prefect or his mayor or his city-lord or his mayor or his prefect or his nephew or his brother or his nephew or his prefect or his city-lord or his mayor or his nephew or his nephew or his prefect or his nephew or
Mannu-ki-... , the ... of the king, my lord, has brought 100 sheep and 100 shekels of silver ...
I am now waiting for their rearguard; when they come, I will speak with them, and when they leave, I will speak with them again.
I tore down that palace in its entirety, (and then) I changed the course of the Tebilti River and directed its flow.
... the king, my lord,
Witness Didiya.
Witness Abi-qamu, chief tailor.
A tablet of ... -ereš to the king, his lord: I have written to the king, my lord, whatever I have heard.
The 'path' on the left of the gall bladder has fissures like a snake...
Month of Sivan (III), 1st day, eponym year of Ilu-taklak.
... the upper part ...
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did you not decide (about the matter)?" — I have now decided (about it). I have weighed out the gold and silver and am herewith sending them over to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, may do as he finds appropriate.
Witness I...
20, in the charge of Nabû-balliṭ;
Witness ... -Nabû.
The king, my lord, knows that ... the ... of the king, my lord, is in the presence of the magnates. Let them be taken out and put aside!
The city of the Itu'eans, the city of the Itu'eans, the city of the Itu'eans, the city of the Itu'eans, the city of the Itu'eans, the city of the Itu'eans, the city of the Itu'eans, the city of the Itu'eans, the city of the Itu'eans, the city of the Itu'eans, the city of the Itu'eans, the city of the Itu'eans, the city of the Itu'e
... of the god Adad, my lord, in the city Tuʾimme
1 seah 1 'litre' of spiced bread; a 'litre' of hammurtu-beer;
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
... for the levy of oxen.
... of this year
The gods Aššur, Anu, Enlil, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Nergal, (and) Nusku, the great gods, my lords, decreed a curse, a grievous curse, upon me as my fate. They made me, a dog, ... like a dog. They made me, a dog, ... like a dog. They made me, a dog, ... like a dog. They made
... years
... the palace herald
Disregard that they (= the Ionians) plunder in the country...
... to Nabû-šarru-uṣur
10 minas of red wool, 10 minas of black, belonging to Dadî, at the disposal of Aššur-na'di.
The sons of Nabû-eṭir, the sons of Nabû-šuma-iddina, the sons of Nabû-šuma-ibni, the sons of Nabû-šuma-iddina, the sons of Nabû-šuma-ibni, the sons of Nabû-šuma-iddina, the sons of Nabû-šuma-ibni, the sons of Nabû-šuma-ibni, the sons of Nabû-šuma-ibni, the sons of Nabû-šuma-ibni,
an estate of 1 hectare ... adjoining ...
... they are placed ...
... the house of the king of the lands, my lord, ...
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, have jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
Bel and Nabû ...
1 ... of ivory, a mounting of ... , ... of a braid of ... ;
The palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe.
May the king, my lord, write me what the news is, and I will  (then) write to the Palace.
Witness Mannu-ki-Aššur, royal bodyguard.
Now, if it is agreeable to the king, my lord, let the king, my lord, write me what the king my lord commands, and I will do accordingly.
Nabû-kenu-dugul,
The city Ubala, the city Ubala, the city Ubala, the city Ubala, the city Ubala, the city Ubala, the city Ubala, the city Ubala, the city Ubala, the city Ubala, the city Ubala, the city Ubala, the city Ubala, the city Ubala, the city Ubala, the city Ubala, the city Ubala, the city Ubala, the city Ubala, the city Ubala, the city Ubala, the city
If the moon at its appearance stands low and becomes visible: the land will become happy.
... I shall send ...
... I am herewith sending to the king, my lord, the letter which Aššur-iddina sent to me. The king, my lord, should read it.
Witness Iqbi-Dadî.
The magnates of the king, my lord, have been very much afraid of the king, my lord. They have not set foot anywhere near the king, my lord. They have been very much afraid of the king, my lord.
and ... ed ...
I am herewith sending him to the king, my lord.
The king, my lord, should know that the work on the palace is very much behind schedule.
Witness Aššur-šarru-uṣur, chariot driver of the crown prince.
... my ...
Witness Sin-uballiṭ, ...
Fingernail of Zababa-eriba, owner of the house being sold.
the news of which ...
If a star stands in the halo of the moon: the king will exercise complete dominion; the land will become happy.
The palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of Assyria: (slab) belonging to the house of boxwood, a gift from the land Tabal, which I had made into a door and hung in the gateway of the palace of the city Kalḫu. Whoever erases my inscribed name (or) places (it) in the service of a god (or another) person
I shall give ...
... of the land of Akkad
... Nabû-eṭir-...
in all 4 hectares of land by the seah of 8 'litres', a threshing-floor, a well, a garden, and a grazing land in the town of Zizî —
Does your great divinity know it? Is it pleasing to your great divinity? Is it acceptable to your great divinity? Is it pleasing to the great lord, Sin? Is it acceptable to the great lord, Sin?
Witness Ilu-taklak, cohort commander.
... I ... ed ... I ... ed ... I ... ed ... I ... ed ... I ... ed ... I ... ed ... I ... ed ... I ... ed ... I ... ed ... I ... ed ... I ... ed ... I ... ed ... I ... ed ... I ... ed ... I ... ed ...
1 sheep, 1 bowl of wine: the treasurer;
The 'station' is present. The 'path' is present. The 'strength' is present...
they go ...
... 20 ...
... the temple of the goddess Ištar ...
of Nabû-bel-šumate ...
The city-lords of the magnates have come to me, saying: "The king, our lord, has ordered us to bring the logs to the king, our lord." I have sent my messenger to the king, my lord.
(As for) Uaiteʾ (Iautaʾ), son of Hazael, son of a brother of Uaiteʾ, son of a brother of Hazael, son of a brother of Hazael, son of a brother of Hazael, son of a brother of Hazael, son of a brother of Hazael, son of a brother of Hazael, son of a brother of Hazael, son of a brother of Hazael, son of a brother of Hazael, son of a brother of Hazael, son of a brother of Hazael, son of a brother of Hazael, son of a
... 20 hectares of land in the town of ...
From Zakir.
Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also king of Assyria:
Witness ...
I, Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, viceroy of Ur and Eridu, son of Ashurbanipal, viceroy of Ur and Eridu, son of Esarhaddon, viceroy of Ur and Eridu, descendant of Sennacherib, viceroy of Ur and Eridu, descendant of Sargon (II), viceroy of Ur and Eridu —
... Aššur-ila'i
Witness Ahu-lamur.
The 5th day, the 6th day, the 7th day, the 8th day, the 9th day, the 10th day, the 11th day, the 12th day, the 13th day, the 14th day, the 15th day, the 16th day, the 17th day, the 18th day, the 19th day, the 20th day, the 21st day, the 22nd day, the 23rd day,
If the moon at its appearance stands low and becomes visible: the land will become happy.
Witness Yatana-yati'. Witness Na'di-...
... nu, son of Nabû-eṭir, ... , son of Ahi-ṭaba, ... , son of ... , ... ,
... 16 trays of cakes;
Month of Shebat (XI), 10th day, eponym year of Dananu.
On the 28th day the king went down to the House of God. He performed the sheep offerings before Aššur and Mullissu. He performed those before the gods of heaven. He performed those before the gods of earth.
adjoining ...
... Babylon
The whole city of Akkad rejoiced ...
Witness Ibašši-ilu.
Ditto by all the gods of Arbela!
In the course of my campaign, I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Bīt-Daganna, Joppa, Azuru, (and) Azuru-Kabti, the cities of Ṣidqâ that had not submitted to me quickly. I brought out of them 200,000 people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty.
6 oxen ...
... the gods on account of this ...
... his ...
adjoining the field of Nabû-duru-uṣur,
The coils of the colon are 10 in number. The heart of the ram is normal.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. Good health to the king, my lord!
If in Shebat (XI) the sun stands in the halo of the moon: the king of Akkad will die; the king of Elam will die.
Now, what are the king my lord's orders?
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
from the town of Dag...
If a planet comes close to the north: Akkad will become happy.
The palace herald has written to me from the Palace: "The king, my lord, should send word that they (= the magnates) should be arrested and brought here." Now then I am sending them over to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
1 ditto, 1 seah;
When the king, my lord, was in the city of Akkad, I was in the city of Der. Now the king, my lord, has crossed the river. I have crossed the river with the king, my lord, and am herewith waiting for the king, my lord.
The land of the king, my lord, is well; the forts of the king, my lord, are well; the ... of the king, my lord, are well; the ... of the king, my lord, are well; the ... of the king, my lord, are well; the ... of the king, my lord, are well; the ... of the king, my lord, are well; the ... of the king, my lord, are well; the ... of the king, my lord, are well; the ... of the king, my lord, are well; the ... of the king, my
... to the 'son' of ...
I ask you Šamaš, great lord, whether, (should) Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, appoint the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the position which is written in this papyrus,
of T...
deputy (governor),
If in the month of the sun the north wind blows: the land will become happy.
The palace of Amēl-Marduk, king of Babylon, son of Nebuchadnezzar (II), king of Babylon, descendant of Sennacherib, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, descendant of the eternal line of Bēl-bāni, son of Adasi, descendant of the eternal line of the house of Aššur —
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... the land of Sumer and Akkad
The king, my lord, knows that I am a dog of the king, my lord. I have no house of my own. I have no servant or maid. I have no one to take care of my clothes. I have no one to take care of my shoes. I have no one to take care of my bed. I have no one to take care of my throne. I have no one to take care of my scepter. I have no one to take care of my throne. I have no one to take care of my throne. I have no one to take care of my throne. I have no one
... the magnates
He shall give them back in Nisan (I). If he does not, they shall increase by the same amount.
Your servant Nabû-naṣir: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: I have sent my messenger to greet the king, the horses and the mules.
Witness Aplu-uṣur.
When the king, my lord, sent me to the city of Der, I did not see a single one of the men of the magnates, not one of the men of the governors, not one of the men of the city-lords, not one of the men of the city-dwellers, not one of the men of the palace superintendents, not one of the men of the palace heralds, not one of the men of the palace overseers, not one of the men of the palace scribes, not one of the men of the city-dwellers, not one
Witness Nabû-ahu-uṣur, scribe.
Concerning the ritual about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Perform it tomorrow" — we shall perform it tomorrow.
1, Aššur-iddina, cohort commander;
He shall give the vineyard back in its original amount.
in all 4 Kushite horses,
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-ila'i. Good health to the king, my lord!
To the goddess Ištar, his mistress: Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I), king of Assyria, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also king of Assyria, dedicated (this) for his life.
If in Ab (V) Adad thunders: there will be famine in the land ...
Month Iyyar (II), 22nd day, eponym year of Dadî, treasurer of the Aššur temple.
The servants of the king, my lord, who are in my presence, have been treated like this: When they saw that I was not in the presence of the king, they became frightened and said: "If they come and kill us, we will die." Now, if the king, my lord, commands, they may come and kill them.
in all 5 complete polyptychs, 4 leaves,
The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the king, my lord. I have no house of my own. I have no servant or maid. I have no one to take care of the household of the king, my lord. I have no one to take care of the household of the king, my lord. I have no one to take care of the household of the king, my lord.
For the goddess Ištar, his lady: Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of Assyria, dedicated (this) for his life and the life of his city.
Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
I am now waiting for them. If they do not come, I will go and see the king, my lord. I will also speak with the king, my lord, and return to the camp.
12 shekels of silver belonging to ... , at the disposal of ...
The palace of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, descendant of the eternal line of Bēl-bāni, son of Adasi, founder of the kingship of Assyria.
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
... Nabû-šezib
In the course of my campaign, I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Bīt-Daganna, Joppa, Azuru, (and) Azuru-kettu-iram. I brought out of them 200,000 people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty.
The king ... to ...
... of ...
The 'path' on the left of the gall bladder has fissures like a snake...
11 shekels of silver of ...
The sons of Sîn-ašared, who are in the presence of the king, my lord,
total, x+1; 1 house;
1 ditto ditto, the 'path' on the left of the gall bladder;
If the sun stands in the halo of the moon: the king will be shut up; the land will not prosper; the king will die.
1 cow of silver;
On the 1st of Nisan (I), I shall set out and go to ... , and I shall bring the ... s to the king, my lord.
... the land of Akkad, the crown prince and the sons of the king, my lord,
... I made ... rise up and I mustered the workmen of the gods Šamaš and Marduk and they (the gods) commanded me to (re)build Esagil and Babylon. I mustered the workmen of the gods Šamaš and Marduk and they (the gods) commanded me to (re)build Esagil and Babylon. I mustered the workmen of the gods Šamaš and Marduk and they (the gods) commanded me to (re)build Esagil and Babylon.
I built (and) completed that temple from its foundation(s) to its crenellations. I made (it) higher than the one in the days of the past. I deposited my monumental inscription. I anointed with oil the monumental inscriptions of the kings, my ancestors, made sacrifices, and returned them to their places.
I have now written to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should do as he finds appropriate. Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Aššur-belu-uṣur or his sons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Remanni-Adad, his sons and his grandsons,
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: reliable speech; the land will become happy; the gods will remember Akkad favorably.
3 minas, Nabû-šarru-uṣur, goldsmith;
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
son of Aya-suri,
Instead of their seals they impressed their fingernail.
Any lawsuit or litigation is void.
The gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Nergal, (and) Nusku, the great gods, my lords, decreed a curse, a grievous curse, upon me as my fate.
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), offspring of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, descendant of Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria —
in the month of ...
1, the son of Zabayu, reporter;
The chief of trade.
... the city of Der ...
Now then I am sending over the ... which they ... ed.
Month ... , 22nd day, eponym year of ...
The 16th day, when the god ... , is the day of the scream ...
... he will die.
Aššur-uballiṭ has contracted and bought them for 30 shekels of silver.
... the king, my lord, ...
He has taken it as a loan. It shall increase by a fourth.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
The king, my lord, should ask the chief tailor about the matter.
... s
(As for) the son of Yakīn-Lû, the son of Bēl-iqīša, the son of Bunnannū, the son of Dannaya, the son of Bīt-Daganna, the son of Ḫamrānu, the son of ... , the son of ... , the son of ... , the son of ... , the son of ... , the son of ... , the son of ... , the son of ... , the son of ... , the son of ... , the son of ... , the son of ... , the son of
... let him eat
The king, my lord, knows that the work on the palace is very much behind schedule. The king, my lord, should not be afraid of this. The king, my lord, should not say: "Why did you not write me (about it)?"
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... Arrapha ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
Now ...
... the king of Assyria ... the city of Arbela ... I built ... I completed ... I made ... I built ... I completed ... I built ... I completed ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Issar-duri. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May the great gods bestow long days, well-being and joy upon the king, my lord!
6 towns in the desert ...
Witness Nabû-...
Aššur-da''inanni,
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
The king's word to the Elamites: I ...
The king, my lord, should ask the chief eunuch; he knows (about it).
8 trays of ... , ... to ... ;
... of the 'finger' is split.
This is its interpretation.
Concerning the news of the son of Yakin: he has set out from Babylon and gone to Borsippa. He has heard that the son of Yakin has been arrested in Borsippa and is being held there.
When the king, my lord, ... ed me to ... , I did not know that I would be treated in this way. Now, if it is agreeable to the king, my lord, let me be treated in this way. If not, let me be treated in another way.
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: reliable speech; the land will become happy.
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of ... , governor of ...
... to my father ...
... I made greater than my forefathers.
... of the Itu'eans ...
... of the magnates
in the middle of ...
Witness Qurdi-...
... the Itu'eans
In the month of Sivan (III), on the 1st day, I set out from Assur and went to Babylon. I entered Babylon on the 2nd of Sivan (III). I stayed in Babylon for 10 days. I visited the tombs of the kings, my ancestors, and (then) returned to Assur. I set out from Assur on the 11th of Sivan (III) and went to Borsippa. I stayed in Borsippa for 10 days. I visited the tombs of the kings, my ancestors, and (
... of their land
Fear not, my lord! ...
... his father
I, Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, had a stone that I carried here from the city Galaṭu, which is in the district of the city Dūr-Šarrukīn, and I had (it) placed in the wall of the city Dūr-Šarrukīn, which is in the district of the city Dūr-Šarrukīn.
Witness Mannu-ki-Arbail. Witness Barruqu.
1 1/2 mina, 1 1/4 shekels, ... ;
Nabû-šezib, son of Nabû-na'di, his servant —
Emašmaš, “House, place of destiny”: the house of Belat-ekalli.
Afterwards, Teumman, the (very) image of a gallû-demon, sat on the throne of Urtaku. He constantly sought out evil (ways) to kill the children of Urtaku (and) the children of Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II), the brother of Urtaku, (iv 55) the brother-in-law of Ummanaldašu (Ḫumban-ḫaltaš II), the son of Urtaku, and the rest of the offspring of Urtaku, the king of the
Witness Dusî.
Ashur-nerari-belu-usur,
4 ... sheep ... ;
... s, gardeners, cooks
The son of Yakin ... , who had not bowed down to my yoke, ... and ... he bowed down to my yoke. He brought his daughter, his own offspring, to Nineveh to serve as a housekeeper. He brought his son, his own offspring, to serve as a ...
I have written to the Palace. Let them do as they find appropriate.
In the course of my campaign, I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Bīt-Daganna, Joppa, Azuru, (and) Azuru-kettu-iram. I brought out of them 200,000 people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, and I counted (them) as booty.
Witness NN, cupbearer.
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, who is now intent on sending Nabû-šezib to the district of Gambulu,
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
Witness Aššur-šallimanni. Witness Šarru-nuri.
... &  beer ...
On my third campaign, I marched against Baʾalu, the king of the land Tyre who resides in the middle of the sea. Because he did not honor my royal command(s and) did not obey the pronouncement(s) from my lip(s), I set up outposts against him. To prevent his people from leaving, I reinforced (its) garrison. By sea and dry land, I took control of (all of) his routes (and thus) cut off (all) access to him. (ii 1) I made water (and) food for the preservation
The 28th day.
30 ... s, 1 ...
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhe, ditto.
... s, the 'path' is present. The 'strength' is present...
In the future, at any time, whether these men or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or his prefect or his governor or his mayor or his city-lord or his mayor or his prefect or his nephew or his brother or his nephew, seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Remanni-Adad and his sons,
Witness Tabnî.
5 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish belonging to Nabû-nadin-aplu, at the disposal of Aššur-duru-uṣur, scribe of the chief treasurer.
total, 4 ... s of the god ...
Mannu-ki-Aššur,
6 bags of (mixed) kernels.
The king, my lord, should ask the chief eunuch whether there is any barley in the storehouse.
He shall give the silver back on the new moon day of the month of Iyyar (II).
The 'hand' of Nanaya ...
in all 100 oxen, 800 sheep;
To the king, my lord: your servant PN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
The king, my lord, knows that I am a dog of the king, my lord. I have no house of my own. I have no servant or maid. I have no one to take care of my clothes. I have no one to take care of my shoes. I have no one to take care of my bed. I have no one to take care of my throne.
On the 6th of Nisan (I), I set out from the Inner City with 100 men of mine and 100 men of my father's house and went to the city of the Hagaranu. I brought out the men of the city of the Hagaranu and the men of the city of the Hagaranu who were in the fortress of the Hagaranu and the men of the city of the Hagaranu who were in the city of the Hagaranu and the men of the city of the Hagaranu who were in the
Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, had the wall of Nineveh built anew and raised as high as a mountain. He had (it) filled with splendor, (making it) an object of wonder for all of the people. He had (it) made bright as day and (thus) made its site shine like the sun. He had (it) built for his life and the life of his city. He had (it) built for the sake
in all 3, servants of Bel-... —
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord!
Nergal-ila'i,
... the city of ...
... the city of Arbela
... upon them ...
Ešarra-šumu-ukin, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Ikūnum, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Erišum (I), vice-regent of the god Aššur:
I, Aššur-etel-ilāni-mukīn-apli, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, king of the universe, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of the universe, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad — (5) the wall of Babylon which had buckled in the face of the mighty flood and had become weak had been rebuilt by the command of the god Aššur and the
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did you not send me the news of the son of Yakin until now?" —
... the upper part ...
I did not know that you had set out and gone to the Palace. Now, if you are alive, you must not go outdoors on an evil day. If you must go out, you must not go out on an evil day.
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
The palace of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, descendant of the eternal line of Bēl-bāni, son of Adasi, founder of the city Qattānu, whose place of ultimate origin is Baltil (Aššur), descendant of the eternal line of Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, viceroy of Ur, whose place of ultimate origin is Eridu, descendant of the eternal line of
1 woman, 1 daughter, weaned: a total of 2 women ...
... we shall do.
The king, my lord, knows that the city-lords of Assyria are not reliable. They do not keep the watch which the king, my lord, assigned to them. They ... the ... of the king, my lord.
with ...
Month of Ṣippu, twenty-first day, eponymy of Mannu-ki-Aššur.
When I heard that the king, my lord, had sent me to the Palace, I was happy indeed, and I was looking forward to serving the king, my lord. Now, however, I have become depressed and worried. I do not know whether I will be able to serve the king, my lord.
... the god Aššur, the great lord, the father of the gods, the one who decrees fates, the one who decrees destinies, the one who makes opposing forces agree, the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the
The temple of the goddess Ištar of Uruk, which Sargon (II), king of Assyria, had built had buckled and its walls had buckled. Aššur-dān, king of Assyria, son of Tiglath-pileser (II), king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (II), king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rabi (II) (who was) also king of Assyria, had the temple of the goddess Išt
The forts and the land of the king, my lord, are well. The king, my lord, can be glad.
at the disposal of Ubru-Nabû, ...
Šumma-ilu has contracted and bought them from Mannu-ki-Arbail for 10 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
Witness Bel-na'di.
1 sheep, 1 bowl of wine, 1 litre of beer, 5 litres of wine, 5 litres of beer — the palace herald;
The king, my lord, should ask (about it).
61 ... , the chief ... ;
... the xth day;
... the servant of the king, my lord, who has been treated like a dog, has become a dog. The king, my lord, should not say: "Why did you not come?" The servants of the king, my lord, have been treated like dogs. The king, my lord, should not say: "Why did you not come?" The servants of the king, my lord, have been treated like dogs.
Nabû-... , son of NN, the ... of the temple of DN, has come to me, saying: "The temple of DN is in ruins. The king, my lord, should know (this)." I have now written to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should do as he deems best.
If in Shebat (XI) Adad thunders: there will be famine in the land.
I am now waiting for the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, wait for me until the 10th of Nisan (I), and I will then get the work done and deliver it to the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
The palace of Ashurbanipal, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of Assyria.
Concerning the ... s about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
of the palace ... of the city of ...
... I am herewith sending ... to the king, my lord. I am herewith sending ... to the king, my lord. I am herewith sending ... to the king, my lord.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
as the king ...
The city-lord of Nippur has come to me, saying: "The king has ordered me to bring the people of the city-wall into the city-wall."
1,200 sheep of Remanni-Adad, the chariot driver of the king,  of the Itu'eans;
the rest of the ...
On my return march, I received a substantial payment from the distant Medes (and) the kings of the land Ḫatti (Syria-Palestine), (ii 5) (and) from the city rulers of the cities Ashdod, Sidon, (and) Arwad, (ii 10) (and) considered them as people of Assyria.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
... of the outer wall
The king of the universe, my lord, knows that the gods of the Westland are very angry with the king of the universe, my lord.
Witness Mutakkil-Marduk.
... Witness Aplu-uṣur.
and when the king, my lord, sent me to the service of Zakir, I was  appointed there.
to ...
the news of them is ...
... of silver belonging to Dannî, at the disposal of the cupbearer.
Witness Šulmu-beli-lamur, scribe.
and when he saw, he said:
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether, (should) Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, appoint the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the position which is written in this papyrus,
I have sent 1,000 sheep and 1,000 goats to the vizier, my lord.
... the town of Kar-...
... king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, king of the universe, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of the universe, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad ...
I have sent ... to the Palace. The ... which they ... ed ...
... I made greater than my forefathers ...
If the sun stands in the halo of the moon: there will be truth in the land, and the son will speak the truth with his father; universal peace.
... Abi-lešir, chariot driver
The gods of the king, my lord, have ... ed and are happy.
Disregard that they (= the Ionians) are few in number, that they are weak, that they are poor, (and that) they have no leader...
Witness Urad-Nanaya, servant of the vizier.
... I have sent to the Palace
10 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish belonging to Bel-dan, at the disposal of Zabinu, goldsmith, at the disposal of Abi-qamu.
He shall give the vineyard back in Iyyar (II). If he does not, it shall increase by a fourth.
... Witness Nergal-šarru-uṣur.
... to the lord of kings
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable.
Witness Nabû-šezib.
... to ...
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... 8 bags of (mixed) kernels; 6 bags of (mixed) kernels;
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, chariot driver of the palace superintendent.
... with Na'di-ilu
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
The king, my lord, knows that ... is not ... ; they are ... and do not know how to do the work.
the singer ...
... Concerning the work on the river about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
... I have not been able to finish ...
... of this ...
Dur-Šarrukku,
... Nabû-šezibanni, son of Nabû-eṭir-napšati, ...
The son of Yakin-Lû, the son of Nabû-šuma-iddina, the son of Nabû-šuma-ibni, the son of Nabû-šuma-iddina, the son of Nabû-šuma-ibni, the son of Nabû-šuma-iddina, the son of Nabû-šuma-ibni, the son of Nabû-šuma-ibni, the son of Nabû-šuma-ibni, the son of Nabû-šuma-ibni, the
(As for) Umba-LAGABua, son of Teʾri, a servant who belonged to me who had fled to the land Elam, who had come before me and grasped the feet of my royal majesty, (and) whom I had installed as king of the land Elam, he, like Teʾri, the father of his father, incited the people of the land Elam to rebel against him and they cast his corpse into a street of his city. They placed Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II), son of Atta-metu
Nabû-šumu-uṣur, son of Marduk-na'di;
The people of the land Ḫimme, who had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors, (and) had not sent their messengers to them, now sent their messengers to me. I received from them their audience gift(s) and ... their tribute. I imposed upon Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan) and his brothers, the sons of Yakīn-Lû, their king, the payment of gold, silver, (and) choice stones as their annual payment.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šarru-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
... I did not bring
... I will not let ... pass by ... I will not let ... pass by ... I will not let ... pass by ... I will not let ... pass by ... I will not let ... pass by ...
The son of Yakin-Lû, son of Aššur-naṣir, son of Aššur-duru-uṣur, son of Aššur-naṣir, son of Aššur-duru-uṣur, son of Aššur-naṣir, son of Aššur-duru-uṣur, son of Aššur-naṣir, son of Aššur-duru-uṣur, son of Aššur-naṣir, son of Aššur-
and when ...
Month of Sivan (III), ... th day, eponym year of NN, the treasurer.
we shall go ...
5 sheep, 5 bowls of wine, 5 litres of oil, 5 litres of honey, 5 litres of wine, 5 litres of beer, 5 litres of sesame, 5 litres of dates, 5 litres of olives, 5 litres of pomegranates, 5 litres of grapes, 5 litres of figs, 5 litres of dates, 5 litres of olives, 5 litres of sesame, 5 litres of dates, 5 litres of grapes,
... in the temple of the goddess Ištar ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ... I made ...
... 4 ... s
a ditto of quinces;
... The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... I
3 son(s) of Nabû-zeru-lešir;
The god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons prevail over all (my) enemies. He made all of the black-headed (people) bow down at my feet (and) elevated me for shepherding the land and people.
we shall go ...
6 ... of the New Palace;
The palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of Assyria: (slab) belonging to the house of boxwood, a gift from the land Tabal, (and) belonging to the house of cedar, a gift from the land Ḫatti. Whoever erases my inscribed name (or) places (it) in the service of a god (or another) person
The 'station' is present. If the 'paths' are two, (and) the upper part is located on the lower part: the enemy's weapons will prevail over the prince's weapons...
(As for) the one who alters my inscription or my name, may the god Aššur, the great lord, the father of the gods, the one who decrees fates, the one who resides in Eḫursaggalkurkurra, the great lord, the father of the gods, the one who decrees fates, the one who resides in Eḫursaggula, the great lord, the father of the gods, the one who decrees fates, the one who resides in Eḫursaggula, the great lord, the father of the gods,
The king, my lord, should ask Mannu-ki-Arbail about the matter.
... and the 'station' ...
... 5 ...
I have now sent my messenger to the Palace. He will return to me as soon as he has seen the king, my lord.
... I will not ...
The king, my lord, should ask Mannu-ki-Arbail about the work on the palace superstructure. He knows that he has not yet finished it.
May the goddess Ištar, supreme lady, look upon this work with pleasure and may a good word for me be set upon her lips!
... the city Šiddi-hiriti
40 sheep;
(As for) Uallî, son of Bēl-iqīša, a Gambulian who had cast off the yoke of my lordship and had not bowed down to the yoke of my lordship, I forcibly removed the gods of his father’s house, himself, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his brothers, (and other) offspring of his father’s house and took him to Assyria. I placed (them) under the authority of a eunuch of mine, the governor of the city Arrapḫa.
let him do ...
The city of Der, a royal city of Assyria, which is situated on the bank of the Euphrates,
adjoining the house of Eriba-...
On the 1st of Nisan (I), the day that the king, my lord, commanded, I shall be in the presence of the king, my lord.
... with Aššur-ila'i ...
If in Sivan (III) Adad thunders and the day is cloudy, it rains, lightning flashes, lightning strikes, lightning shatters, lightning flashes twice, lightning shatters thrice, lightning shatters thrice again, lightning shatters thrice again again, lightning shatters thrice again again again, lightning shatters thrice again again again again, lightning shatters thrice again again again again again, lightning shatters thrice again again again again again again again again again again again again again again again again again again again again again again again again again
10 minas of silver, capital, fine imposed by the vizier, at the disposal of the treasurer.
When you are to strew salt before Sîn in the evening, you say: “Sîn, Šamaš, Iššar, Ninurta, and Nusku,
The gods of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria,
Nabû-šezib, servant of Mannu-ki-Arbail —
To the king, my lord: your servant Nashir-Bel. Good health to the king, my lord!
... Kabtî, Nabû-šezib
Nabû-šezibanni;
6 wooden boxes ...
The king, my lord, knows that I am a dead dog. I have no life. I have no house. I have no field. I have no house. I have no field. I have no house. I have no house. I have no house. I have no house. I have no house. I have no house. I have no house. I have no house. I have no house. I have no house. I have no house. I have no house. I have no house. I have no house. I have no house. I have no house. I have no house. I have no house
... of the palace superintendent
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), capable shepherd, favorite of the great gods, guardian of truth who loves justice, (i 5) renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the insubmissive, (and) the one who strikes enemies with lightning:
The king, my lord, knows that the Itu'eans are very numerous. They are constantly  coming and going to the Palace. The king, my lord, should ask them where they  are going and where they are coming from.
1 1/3 mina, NN, ... of the queen mother;
Nabû-šezibanni,
The son of Yakin-Lû, a servant of the king, my lord, has written to me:
(As for) the people of the land Bīt-Daganna, who had sinned against the treaty sworn by the great gods and had transgressed against the oath of the lord of lords, and (as a result) had become slaves, I imposed a harsh punishment upon them. I placed them in the hands of their (own) governors, who had no mercy or pity for them. I imposed upon them corvée and labor like that of the gods Anu and Enlil. I imposed upon them (the same) punishment as the father who had engendered them.
The land of the king is well; the forts are well; the king, my lord, can be glad.
the woman Azi-qamu, ditto;
If in Ab (V) Adad thunders: there will be famine in the land.
In the charge of Iddin-ahhe, the palace superintendent.
... this ...
Concerning the ... s about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me:
... I will make.
to ...
the king, my lord, ...
To the 'farmer,' our lord: your servants Adad-šumu-uṣur and  Urad-Ea. Good health to our lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless our lord!
1 ... ,
From Ašaredu.
Witness Balasî.
The king, my lord, should ask the scribe of the palace superintendent whether or not he has given silver to the merchants.
The palace of ... , king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria: ...
the words which he/they ...
In the plain, the sons of the king, my lord, killed the men of the city lords of the cities Ša-pî-Bel and Ša-pî-Bēl.
... the singer whom he ...
Witness Adad-aplu-iddina.
... of the day that I saw
... of the oxen ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
When I heard that the son of Yakin had come to Babylon, I wrote to the king, my lord: "He has come to Babylon." Now, when I heard that he has gone to Borsippa, I wrote to the king, my lord: "He has gone to Borsippa."
... Il-yadini ...
... I am the king's servant.
In the morning, at the time of the rising of the sun,
... them ...
In the plain, the men of the magnates who were with me ...
in all x persons, servants of these men —
Now let the king, my lord, do as he finds appropriate.
he went ...
I have sent my messenger to the Palace. He has come back and told me: "The Palace has sent you this order: 'If you should sin against this treaty tablet, you will die.'"
... upon the land of Akkad ...
... he is doing ...
in the presence of the goddess Ištar,
... the coils of the colon are 16 in number...
The king, my lord, should ask the son of Yakin: "Why did you not write me?"
Moreover, (as for) the cities Ḫirimmu (and) Ḫarutu (which are) fortresses of Karduniaš (Babylonia), I conquered those cities from the opposite bank of the Lower Zab to the city Tīl-Bāri which is upstream from the land Zaban. I annexed those cities to Assyria.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nadin-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
The one who crushed the Barnaki, a dangerous enemy, who live in the land Tīl-Ašurri, which is called Pitānu in the language of the people of the land Miḫrānu; the one who scattered the Mannean people, undisciplined Gutians — (as for) the land Patušarri, a district in the area of the salt desert, which is in the midst of the land of the distant Medes, borders on the land of the Lullumu, the land of the Šubaru, the land of the Yasub
To the king, our lord: your servants Nabû-ereš and Nabû-šumu-iddina. Good health to the king, our lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, our lord!
