I sent my messenger to Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II) regarding these matters. He detained the eunuch of mine whom I had sent (Marduk-šarru-uṣur) and did not give a reply to my word(s).
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
11 Kushite horses from the commander-in-chief ...
5 minas, 1/3 mina, 1/2 mina, 1/3 mina, 1/4 mina, 1/6 mina, 1/7 mina, 1/8 mina, 1/10 mina, 1/12 mina, 1/13 mina, 1/14 mina, 1/15 mina, 1/16 mina, 1/17 mina, 1/18 mina, 1/19 mina, 1
... the 'path' ...
the eclipse ...
... the base of the middle 'finger' of the lung ...
... now then ...
total, the palace of ...
From this day, the 10th day of this month, Iyyar (II), of this year, to the 9th day of Sivan (III) of this year,
Witness Barruqu, chariot driver.
May Nergal, the strongest among the gods, destroy his people through plague and pestilence, and may he uproot him from the land of his enemy. May he bring about the defeat of his army in the thick of battle, and may he fill the plain with the corpses of his warriors.
2 ...
Witness Urdu-Nabû, scribe.
... I have given to the servants of the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should know (about this).
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord!
... of Aya-ila'i ...
1, chariot driver(s) of the king;
Nergal-ilaya, son of Nabû-... , servant of the king, my lord, has contracted and bought them from Nabû-eriba for x minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
4 cavalrymen of the house of the treasurer.
40 hectares of land in the town of U... , adjoining the road leading to the town of U... and the road leading to the town of U... ;
Month Iyyar (II), 21st day, eponym year of Bel-emuranni, governor of Arrapha.
... -šumu-uṣur ...
Ahu-duri, ...
... the heart of the sheep is normal ...
... -ibni, NN, Abi-rahî, NN, NN,
I had a palace of breccia, alabaster, elephant ivory, ebony, boxwood, musukkannu-wood, cedar, cypress, juniper, and terebinth, constructed thereon as my royal residence; I had a portico, a replica of a Hittite palace, constructed opposite (its) gates.
Nabû-ušabši, his son, adolescent;
... of the palace scribe.
When the god Marduk, the great lord, looked steadfastly upon my good deeds(s), he became reconciled with the city that had angered (him) and he had (his) mind(s) changed towards (it). He had (his) mind(s) set on (re)building Esagil, the palace of the gods, and he ordered the (re)building of Babylon, the cult center of the Enlil of the gods (Marduk); he had (his) mind(s) set on (re)building Esagil, the palace of the
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether NN or his sons or his brothers, seeks a lawsuit or litigation against NN, his sons and his grandsons,
Witness Mannu-ki-Harran, scribe.
... the goddess Ištar who resides in the city Arbela, the great lady, my lady, who had encouraged me, ... the goddess Ištar who resides in the city Arbela, the great lady, my lady, who had encouraged me, ... the goddess Ištar who resides in the city Arbela, the great lady, my lady, who had encouraged me, ... the goddess Ištar who resides in the city Arbela, the great lady, my lady, who had encouraged me, ... the goddess Ištar who resides in the
... to the crown prince
If Jupiter becomes visible in Ab (V): the king of Akkad will die, and his sons will seize the throne.
... Iau-a'a
... of the house of Ṣalam
10 shekels of silver, capital, belonging to Aššur-šallim, at the disposal of Šumma-ilu.
Witness Sasî, porter.
... the land of the city ... the land of the city ... the land of the city ... the land of the city ... the land of the city ... the land of the city ... the land of the city ... the land of the city ... the land of the city ... the land of the city ... the land of the city ... the land of the city ... the land of the city ... the land of the city ... the land of the city ... the land of the city ... the land of the city ... the land of the city ... the land of the city ... the land of the city ... the land of the city ... the
The god Aššur, the great mountain, ...
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
The palace of the king, my lord, is well. The king, my lord, can be glad. The guard of the king, my lord, is well. The king, my lord, can be glad. The guard of the king, my lord, is well. The king, my lord, can be glad. The guard of the king, my lord, is well. The king, my lord, can be glad.
horses ...
If the king, my lord, commands: "Let the son of Yakin take the kingship of Elam." Let the crown prince of Elam, the crown prince of Babylon, and the crown prince of the Sealand, the sons of Yakin, Nabû-ušallim and Nabû-uṣalli, the sons of Nabû-ušallim, and the sons of Nabû-uṣalli, the sons of Nabû-uṣalli, come to Babylon and
1 house, 1 threshing-floor, 2 orchards, 3 ... , 2 ... , 2 ... , 1 house, 1 threshing-floor, 2 orchards, 1 house, 1 threshing-floor, 2 orchards, 1 house, 1 threshing-floor, 2 orchards, 1 house, 1 threshing-floor, 2 orchards, 1 house, 1 threshing-floor, 2 orchards, 1 house, 1 thres
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Witness Šar-ilani.
The son of Nabû-šuma-iddina, the son of Nabû-šuma-ereš, the son of Nabû-šuma-lišir, the son of Nabû-šuma-le'i, the son of Nabû-šuma-iškun, the son of Nabû-šuma-ereš, the son of Nabû-šuma-lišir, the son of Nabû-šuma-le'i, the son of Nabû-šuma-iškun, the son of
The money is paid completely.
The palace of Sennacherib, king of Assyria, son of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, descendant of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also king of Assyria:
The son of Nabû-ahhe-šallim, the son of Ahu-iddina, the son of Nabû-ahhe-šallim, the son of Nabû-ahhe-eriba, the son of Nabû-ahhe-šallim, the son of Nabû-ahhe-šarru-uṣur, the son of Nabû-ahhe-eriba, the son of Nabû-ahhe-eriba, the son of Nabû-ahhe-eriba, the son of Nabû-
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, and whom Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, has taken into his entourage, will make an insurrection and rebellion against him, or cause others to make insurrection and rebellion against him, or plot it, or cause others to plot it, or ...
If a planet becomes visible in the month of Shebat (XI): the harvest of the land will prosper.
Bel-Harran-belu-uṣur, chariot owner;
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether these men or their sons or their brothers or their nephews, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Remanni-Adad, his sons and grandsons, shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed. The judge shall not hear his case.
A tablet of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, to Šamaš-šumu-ukin, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, his brother.
Month Tishri (VII), 25th day, eponym year of Dananu.
the mountain ...
... and ...
2 bags of chick-peas; 1 bag of ... ;
Ditto by Nabû and Marduk!
... -... -lumur
Total 400, 1 seah 1 'litre' of wine.
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king will make his throne last long.
... and his wife, a weaned son,
Now, if you say: "I will go to ... ," let them go with you.
Ubru-Nabû, ... ;
Total, the gods of the house of the šahūru anteroom.
... of NN
If a planet becomes visible in Elul (VI): the king of Elam will die.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether these men or their sons or their brothers or any relative of theirs, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Kakkullanu and his sons,
Aššur-nārārī, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Išme-Dagan (II), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Išme-Dagan (II), (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil and vice-regent of the god Aššur:
If he, having planned, sends him, and he, having planned, sends him, will the ... of the Elamites, or the ... of the Elamites, or the ... of the Elamites, or the ... of the Elamites, or the ... of the Elamites, or the ... of the Elamites, or the ... of the Elamites, or the ... of the Elamites, or the ... of the Elamites, or the ... of the Elamites, or the ... of the Elamites, or the ... of the Elamites, or the
... his brother, and his son ...
... the 'four quarters'
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Concerning the matter ...
Witness Nabû-...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Nergal-apil-kumu'a or his sons or his brothers or his nephews, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Šumma-ilani and his sons,
adjoining the wadi of ... ,
If a planet comes near the Anzu star: the king of Akkad will die, and his country will experience severe famine.
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord!
News of the son of Yakin: he is in ...
... the king, my lord ...
If on the 14th day the moon and sun are seen together: reliable speech; the land will become happy; the gods will remember Akkad favorably; there will be joy among the people; the king will become happy.
Witness Se'-imme.
I have sent my messenger to the king, my lord; let the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
Now, what are the king my lord's orders? If the king my lord commands, let the king my lord send word that they should bring the gods of the king my lord's household to Babylon, and let the king my lord bring the gods of the king my lord's household into the temple of Marduk, and let the gods of the king my lord's household and the gods of Babylonia dwell together in Esagil.
a writing-board ...
Witness Mar-apla-iddina, ...
who in the land ...
Just as a snake and a scorpion lie in the same hole to lie there together, so may you and your women lie in the same hole to lie there together.
(Property) of Marduk-apla-iddina, son of Nabû-nādin-aḫḫē, governor of the land of Sūḫu.
among them.
Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, king of the four quarters (of the world), ... , pious prince, ... , ... , the one who reveres the great gods, the one who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, the one who (re)constructed the temple of the god Aššur, (re)built Esagil and Babylon, (re)confirmed sattukku (and) ginû
Month Tishri (VII), ... th day, eponym year of Aššur-duru-uṣur.
Nabû-nammir,
the heart ...
they came ...
... of the 'path' is present...
... the scribe ...
Now then I am sending to the king, my lord, ...
Three times I have sent my messenger to the Urarṭian with the following message: "Let the king of Elam come and conclude a treaty with the king of Assyria, and let the king of Assyria come and conclude a treaty with the king of Elam.
... Aššur-šumu-ka''in
The messenger of the king of Elam who came to me, saying: "The king of Assyria is marching against me" —
I had a bridge constructed opposite the Citadel Gate by packing down paving stones of white limestone for my lordly processions. I had bull colossi and sphinxes of white limestone created in the territory of the city Balāṭāya and their forms perfected through the craft of the deity Ninkura.
... therein
Month of Ša-sarrāte, twenty-third day, eponymy of Bēl-lu-balaṭ, governor of the city Arbela.
I received tribute from Mugallu, the Melidean: silver, gold, gold pails, ivory, spears, garments with multi-colored trim, and linen (garments). I gave (them) to my officials.
Witness Nabû-duru-uṣur, son of Bel-le'i.
To Sagabu-ahu-uṣur:
The Lady of Akkad has gone out and ...
... the bodyguard who ...
I brought out a palace woman of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, (and) the women of the harem manageress of the central city (harem), together with the sons of Teumman, the king of the land Elam, and I counted (them) as booty. I brought out the rest of the people of the land Elam, as many as there were, and I counted (them) as booty.
of the son of Nabû-šumu-...
The money is paid completely. That land is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The king, my lord, should send word that they bring me the rest of the Urarṭians who are in the presence of the king, my lord. I will then send the son of Nabû-šarru-uṣur to the king, my lord. I will also send the son of Nabû-šarru-uṣur to the king, my lord, with the following message: "The king, my lord, should ask Nabû-šarru-uṣur whether he is a servant of the king, my lord."
... of the bed
If there is a 'weapon'-mark on the right side of the 'increment' which faces upward: the enemy will attack my army...
Afterwards, Teumman, the (very) image of a gallû-demon, sat on the throne of Urtaku. He constantly sought out evil (ways) to kill the children of Urtaku (and) the children of Ummanaldašu (Ḫumban-ḫaltaš II), the brother of Urtaku. Ummanigaš, Ummanappa, (and) Tammarītu — the sons of Urtaku, Ummanappa, (and) Tammarītu, respectively — Kudurru (and) Parrû — (iv
Witness Abi-ila'i.
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... -zeru-ibni,
The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number. The heart of the ram is normal.
Concerning the ... s of the house of Aššur ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... the men ...
Nabû-le'i, his brother, adolescent;
... Witness Bel-Harran-belu-usur
I rallied my troops from the far bank of the Zab River, crossed the Zab River, and marched to the land of the Medes. I conquered the lands of the Medes from the land of the Zab River to the land of the land of the Bīt-Barrû. I took their cities, their fortresses, their gods, their people, their donkeys, their camels, their oxen, and their sheep and goats, and I brought (them) to my city Aššur.
Witness Mannu-...
400,000 stalks of vine in the town of ... ; Aššur-... , Aššur-šarru-uṣur, Aššur-šarru-uṣur, Aššur-šarru-uṣur, Aššur-šarru-uṣur, Aššur-šarru-uṣur, Aššur-šarru-uṣur, Aššur-šarru-uṣur, Aššur-šarru-uṣur
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šuma-lišir. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May Aššur, Sin, Šamaš, Adad, Ištar of Nineveh, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Gula, Nergal and Laṣ, the great gods, lengthen the days of the king, my lord! May they grant the king, my lord, happiness and physical well-being!
At that time, Nabopolassar, king of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, the one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, the one who is assiduous towards the rites of the great gods, the one who is assiduous towards the rites of the great gods, the one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, the one who provides for the sanctuaries of the great gods, the one who provides for the rites of the great gods, the one who provides for the rites of the great gods, the one who provides for
The priest of Nabû-šarru-uṣur ...
Month of Tammuz (IV), 1st day, eponym year of Dananu of ...
2 cans of hinhinu-seeds;
(As for) the governors, the nobles, and the people of the city Ekron who had thrown Padî, their king who was bound by treaty and oaths to Assyria, into iron fetters and who had handed him over to Hezekiah of the land Judah in a hostile manner, they became frightened on account of the villainous acts they had committed. They formed a confederation with the kings of Egypt (and) the archers, chariots, (and) horses of the king of the land Meluḫḫa, forces without number, and they came to
(As to) what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Give the servants of the treasurer of the Aššur temple ...
We have not seen any (trace) of the Arabs.
If the king, my lord, commands: "Let them ... to the king, my lord."
seal of NN,
I had a canopy, which rivals the heavens, made from musukkannu-wood, a durable wood. I clad its perimeter with thirty-four talents (and) twenty minas of reddish gold and (thereby) reinforced its bonds. I stretched out its covering over the god Marduk, the great lord, and (thereby) secured its roof.
1, Nabû-šarru-uṣur, governor of Arbela;
... the temple of the goddess Ištar ...
their sons ...
8 seahs of wine;
I have sent my messenger to Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II) concerning these matters. He has not yet replied to me.
... minas of silver
... to Der
Witness ...
In the future may a later prince, when that wall becomes dilapidated and he renovates (it), anoint my monumental inscriptions with oil, make a sacrifice, and return (them) to their places. (Then) the god Marduk will listen to his prayers.
Ikūnum, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Erišum (I), vice-regent of the god Aššur:
... Nabû-iqiša
I am now writing to my lord: The king, my lord, should not say: "Why did you not write to me?" I have now written to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
If the moon at its appearance wears a crown: the king will reach the highest rank; the land will dwell as if in pastures near the city; the king will reach the highest rank.
When the king of Elam heard of this, he sent his messenger to me, saying: "Let the king of Assyria and his army come and conquer the city of Uruk. I will go and fight against them. I will not submit to the yoke of the king of Assyria. I will fight with him. I will not do obeisance to him."
In the charge of Aššur-šarru-uṣur, son of NN.
... the 'outside.'
Good health to the king, my lord!
The Pleiades, the Seven Gods, the Narudi, the ... , the Abyss, the ... , the Lions, the Wild Bulls, the Thunderbirds, the ... , the Wild Asses, the ... , the Bull-Son-of-Šamaš, the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ... , the ...
... the 'path' is present...
Witness Abaya.
28 minas of silver, capital, belonging to Ubru-Nabû, at the disposal of Zabinu, son of Nabû-uṣalla.
As to the work on the ziggurat of the baker, I have finished the work on the ziggurat of the baker. I have put the ziggurat of the baker in place and deposited my monumental inscriptions. I have deposited my monumental inscriptions with the monumental inscriptions of the baker. I have deposited my monumental inscriptions with the monumental inscriptions of the baker. I have deposited my monumental inscriptions with the monumental inscriptions of the baker.
(As for) Ummanaldašu (Ḫumban-ḫaltaš III), the king of the land Elam, who had sent his weapons against the Assyrians, I captured him alive in the thick of (that) mighty battle. I took away from him his horses, his mules, his donkeys, his Bactrian camels, his oxen, (and) his sheep and goats, which were more numerous than locusts. I did not leave a single one (of his people) alive. I carried off his people, his heavy plunder,
Witness Šamaš-remanni, cohort commander.
Aya-abu-...
2 cans of wine; 4 cans of beer;
adjoining the road of Calah,
If Adad-ibni ...
300, in the charge of Nabû-aplu-uṣur,
Month ... , 19th day, eponym year of Marduk-šarru-uṣur.
Nabû-zeru-ibni, ... ; his wife; 1 son; 1 woman; 1 daughter; 10,000 stalks of vine; 1 house; 1 threshing-floor; 1 garden.
Ashur-da''inanni,
1 duck. A 2-seah jar of hinhinu-seeds;
(If) he pays it, he shall redeem his land.
... the goddess Ištar
The 'well-being' is present. The 'path' on the left of the gall bladder is present...
The son of Nabû-ušabši has been arrested and is in the presence of the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, ask him whether he is a servant of the son of Nabû-uṣalla.
10 ... ;
What is it that the king, my lord, commands?
Nabû-šumu-iddina ...
... this ...
The king's word to the son of the king: I am well.
The king, my lord, knows that the land of the king is well; the forts are well. The king, my lord, can be glad.
I had twelve gates opened up in it in four directions, in front and behind, (and) along both sides, for entering and leaving.
Witness Nabû'a.
Witness Šep-...
Witness NN. Witness Hannanayu.
adjoining the road of Harran,
... in the mouth of Nabû-šumu-iddina
1 woman (assigned) to Bel-Harran-isse'a for half a mina of silver.
Ashur-le'i, prefect;
there ...
Witness ... -ili, ...
A tablet of Šamaš-šumu-ukin to the Palace Scribe. Good health to my lord!
I have written to you. Do not neglect to keep watch over me!
Concerning the king's subjects who are in Elam, about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Send word that they be brought here!" — I have now sent word, and they are bringing them. Let them bring them, and let the king, my lord, question them.
the goddess Ištar of ...
I have sent ... to the king, my lord; let the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
at the disposal of Bel-... -apli,
... the ... of the king, my lord
In a one-half ikû (stretch) of the water’s (natural) course, I bonded together with bitumen four large limestone (blocks) and spread marsh reeds and rushes over them. I raised a plot of land that was 340 large aslu-cubits along the water’s (natural) course, from the Ḫusur River to the plain of the city (and) from the plain of the city to the plain of the city, 180 large aslu-cubits along the water’s (natural) course,
Nabû-nadin-ahhe, son of Nabû-eṭir, a servant of Nabû-apil-kumu'a —
... of Nabû-...
100 ... ;
... Bel-aplu-iddina, the eunuch of the crown prince, and the eunuchs of the crown prince ...
Witness Šamaš-ila'i, brewer.
We are not able to perform the ritual against the rābiṣu (demon) which is upon us.
May a later prince restore my inscribed name to its place. (Then) the goddess Ištar will listen to his prayers.
The man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity ...
... to the king
they do not know ...
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan).
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether these men or their sons or their brothers or any relative of theirs, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Nabû-eriba,
... Ubrî
11th day.
and his people, NN and his people,
News of the Urarṭian: ... the messenger of the king of ... to the messenger of the king of Urarṭu. The messenger of the king of Urarṭu has ... to the messenger of the king of ...
by the seah of 8 'litres'
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who reveres the great gods, the one who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, the one who is attentive to the rites of the great gods, the one who is assiduous towards the rites of the great gods, the one who is assiduous towards the rites of the great gods, the one who is assiduous towards the rites of the great gods, the one who is assiduous towards the rites of the
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
At that time, in the reign of a previous king, bad omens(s) occurred in the land of Akkad. The people living there were answering each other yes (for) no (and) were telling lies.
to the king, my lord.
Witness ... a, son of Bel-duri.
Venus is seen in the constellation Aries.
a cup of olives;
If he does not pay, it shall increase by a fourth.
I had a stele made, and had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, written on it. I had (this stele) placed before the god Aššur, my lord, and (then) I had the god Aššur, my lord, sit on his seat in his shrine. I made an offering and presented (this stele) to the god Aššur, my lord.
... the son of Aššur-...
... their ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
1 female calf, 1 sheep, 2 spring lambs,
A thigh, a shoulder, outer cuts;
Concerning the news of the Urarṭian, the son of the king, my lord, knows that I am a dog who loves the house of his lord. I have written to the king, my lord, only because I am afraid.
... the ... of the king, my lord
Tiglath-pileser, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (I), strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Mutakkil-Nusku (who was) also strong king, king of the universe (and) king of Assyria:
to ...
(As for) Bēl-iqīša, who had brought about the ruination of the land through the wrath of Marduk, a son (of his), his own offspring, cut him down with the sword. (vii 10') (As for) Nabû-uṣalla, a citizen of Babylon who had incited the people of the land to rebel against Esagil, he brought him to Babylon and handed him over to the king, my lord.
Witness Sagab.
... the governor of Harran
of the sons of the king.
a 2-seah jar of amūmu-beer;
... the house of my lord in ...
... the bed
I have sent ...
with his 30 sons ...
... to the heart of the sheep.
Urad-Ea, ditto ditto;
... the king ...
of the heart ...
The palace of Shalmaneser, great king, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), great king, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also great king, strong king, king of the universe, and king of Assyria.
... the king, my lord
... of the town of Bit-abi-ila'i
to the son of Abu-...
... of the mountain ...
... the front red, of the country;
If Jupiter is bright and carries radiance: the king of Akkad will exercise complete dominion; the king of Akkad will exercise complete dominion; the king of Akkad will exercise complete dominion; the king of Akkad will exercise complete dominion; the king of Akkad will exercise complete dominion; the king of Akkad will exercise complete dominion; the king of Akkad will exercise complete dominion; the king of Akkad will exercise complete dominion; the king of Akkad will exercise complete dominion; the king of Akkad will exercise complete domin
the seed ...
... of the king, my lord, and the son of Yakin, and the son of Yakin has gone to Assyria. The king, my lord, should know (this).
of the king before ...
— On the 14th day the moon and sun are seen together.
of ... the chariot driver(s)
For the goddess Ištar, lady of the lands: Ashurbanipal, king of the four quarters (of the world), son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, renovated Eanna (“House of Heaven”), the temple of highest rank, for the sake of his life, and made (it) shine like daylight.
I ...
We have written to the king, our lord; may the king, our lord, do as he deems best.
400 sheep and ewes, 100 hectares of arable land, 1 house, 1 threshing-floor, 1 garden, in the town of Šabbu.
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Now then I am sending to the king, my lord, the letter which the king, my lord, sent to me.
The land of the king is well; the forts are well. The king, my lord, can be glad indeed. The king, my lord, can be glad indeed. The king, my lord, can be glad indeed.
Total 1,000+x+10 — Šarru-lu-dari.
I have written to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
... to the guard ...
2 of them are missing.
NN ...
Now, if you say: "I want to give the land to my son," let me give it to my son, and let me give my son the field of my father, which he has been enjoying.
... &  beer  &  NN
... to his presence
Seal of ... -beli-taqqin,
Nabû-eriba, servant of Nabû-naṣir —
of the king, my lord, ...
Witness ... -ilu.
The palace of Aššur-nārārī, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Išme-Dagan (II), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Išme-Dagan (II), (who was) also vice-regent of the god Aššur: I had a stele made and had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, written on it.
... to the king, my lord.
In the month of Shebat (XI), on the 22nd day, the king of the lands, the king of Assyria,
Witness Nabû-sakip, ditto.
Witness Mannu-lu-šalim.
I wrote an inscribed object bearing my name and the name of my son, and the names of the great gods, my lords, on it and I deposited (it) for future days. I wrote (this inscription) and placed (it) in the wall of the temple of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, for the sake of the life of my son, for my own life, and for the life of my city.
there ...
... the writing-board
The palace of Shalmaneser, king of the universe, son of Adad-nārārī (I), king of the universe, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also king of the universe: booty of the land of the people of the land Ḫatti.
Month of Sivan (III), 4th day,
Aššur-aplu-uṣur, eunuch of Adad-nadin-ahhe, governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, son of Nergal-nirka-da''in, eunuch of Adad-nadin-ahhe, governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, son of Nabû-nirka-da''in, eunuch of Adad-nadin-ahhe, governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mar
... (As for) Ashurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, his father, who was created for the service of (the god) Aššur and the goddess Mullissu, and (whom) your great divinity knows — after the great gods had commanded him to exercise the kingship of Assyria and he had exercised the kingship of the four quarters (of the world), (and) after he had made the great gods who support him reside in their shrines, and (after) he had made the rites of the
of the king, my lord, ...
Will they conquer that city, Kišassu? Will it be delivered to them? Does your great divinity know it?
a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
... I shall do as the king, my lord, commands.
the exorcist ...
... field of Rimutu in the town of ...
He who erases my inscribed name and writes his (own) name, may the goddess Ištar, lady of battle, break his bow.
... day ...
2 'litres' of spiced bread; 2 'litres' of spiced bread;
... the king, my lord,
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king will make his throne last long.
Jupiter, which is now approaching the place where the sun shines,
(Property) of Šamaš-rēša-uṣur, son of Iqīša-Marduk, son of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan).
In my third campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me and I marched to the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians, a dangerous enemy who since Tukriš (I) had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors. In the mountains, difficult terrain, I rode on horseback and had my personal chariot carried on (men’s) necks. In very rugged terrain I roamed about on foot like a wild bull.
As to the work on the ziggurat of Anu concerning which the king, my lord, wrote me:
An estate of x hectares of land adjoining the road of ... , the road of the wadi of Nabû-... , and the road of the wadi of Nabû-... —
when the king, my lord, ...
Nabû-ahu-iddina, son of NN, his servant —
... the ... s
Witness Issar-nadin-apli, scribe.
I received from them (the Urarṭians) horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats, without number. I carried off to Assyria (their) riding horses, their equipment, their implements of war, and their heavy plunder.
Now then I am sending to you my messenger. Let him come and see you, and let you give him this order:
Ditto by Anu and Antu! Ditto by Illil and Mullissu!
The heart of the sheep is normal. First extispicy...
... of Bel-ibni
Witness Ginnaya, ...
As for me, I am doing my work and am making progress. I have finished the work on the ziggurat of the goddess Ištar of Uruk and am installing the doors. I am also making progress on the ziggurat of the goddess Ištar of Arbela.
... the temple of the goddess Ištar ...
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether these men or their sons or their brothers or their nephews, seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Remanni-Adad and his sons, shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed. The judge shall not hear his case. The gods Aššur, Adad, Šala, and Šarrat-nipha will not listen to his prayers. The goddess Ištar of Uruk will not accept his supplications. The god Nergal will not spare his life. The goddess
Witness Igilî.
The people of the land of the king, my lord, who are in Assyria, whom the king, my lord, has sent to me, and who are staying in the land of the king, my lord, in the Inner City, and in Dur-Šarruken, and who are staying in the land of the king, my lord, in the Inner City, and in Dur-Šarruken, and who are staying in the land of the king, my lord, in the Inner City, and in Dur-Šarruken, and who are staying in the land of the king
... , NN,
May a later prince ... restore my inscribed name to its place. (Then) the god ... will listen to his prayers.
... of the son of Yakin ...
Witness Remut-ili.
The priest of Bel-tarbaṣi, the warden of the House, the cupbearer, the treasurer, the steward, the cupbearer, the cupbearer, the cupbearer, the cupbearer, the cupbearer, the cupbearer, the cupbearer, the cupbearer, the cupbearer, the cupbearer, the cupbearer, the cupbearer, the cupbearer, the cupbearer, the cupbearer, the cupbearer, the cupbearer, the cupbearer, the cupbearer, the cup
... in the land of Akkad ...
they will come ...
May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
... the king of the lands, ... the god Marduk ... the god Nabû ... the goddess Zarpanītu ... the god Nusku ... the goddess Ištar of Uruk ... the goddess Ištar of Nineveh ... the goddess Ištar of Arbela ... the god Nergal ... the goddess Laṣ, the goddess Ištar of the Kidmuri temple ... the god Nusku ... the goddess Ištar of the Kidmuri temple ... the god Nusku ... the goddess Ištar of the Kidm
... I have not seen ... , and I have not seen ... , and I have not seen ... , and I have not seen ... , and I have not seen ... , and I have not seen ... , and I have not seen ... , and I have not seen ... , and I have not seen ... , and I have not seen ... , and I have not seen ... , and I have not seen ... , and I have not seen ... , and I have not seen ... , and I have not seen ... , and I have not seen ... , and I have not seen ... , and I have not seen ... , and I
... his sons
Nabû-šumu-iddina,
... to the presence of the king ...
Total, of the palace women, of the son of Yakin.
to ...
Let them come and ... to me, and let me ... to the king, my lord. I have no ... in the country of my enemy. The king, my lord, should know (this).
Urad-Nanaya, son of Bel-ibni, servant of Šamšī-Adad.
If a planet becomes visible in the path of the Anzu star: the king of Akkad ...
Witness Šar-Issar, ...
10 shekels of silver, capital, by the mina of Carchemish, belonging to Ubru-Nabû, at the disposal of Ubru-Nabû, son of Ubru-Nabû, at the disposal of Kiṣir-Aššur, at the disposal of Kiṣir-Aššur, son of Kiṣir-Aššur.
On the 10th of Tammuz (IV), when the moon was seen with the sun, it was a good omen; on the 14th day, it was bad.
At that time, the temple of the goddess Ištar of Uruk, my mistress, which Aššur-nādin-aḫḫē, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (I), a ruler who came before me, had previously built — that temple had become old, its walls had buckled, its bondings had disintegrated, and its superstructure had collapsed. I removed its debris, renovated its dilapidated section(s), and restored it. I built (and) completed (
... our ...
Witness NN, cohort commander.
On the day when you see this letter, gather the people of your house, and come to me! I will give you orders.
... of ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Send your messenger to Ullusunu with the following message: 'Let your messenger come to me'" — I have sent my messenger to Ullusunu. If he comes back and tells me: "Let the king, my lord, send me to Ullusunu," I shall send him to Ullusunu. If he does not come back and tells me: "Let the king, my lord, send me to Ullusunu," I shall write to the king, my lord, whatever news there
The men of the Palace Superintendent have been selling the sheep of the Palace Superintendent for silver.
Does your great divinity know it? Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
1, Abaya, deputy of the palace herald;
... his ...
The tribute of the land of the people of the land Ḫatti.
... we
The coils of the colon are ... in number. The heart of the sheep is normal. Check-up. Favorable.
a flagon of bittersweet beer;
... of the month Nisan (I)
Witness Šarru-emuranni, horse trainer.
... the palace ... I built anew. I made (it) larger than before. I built (and) completed (it) from its foundation(s) to its crenellations. I roofed it with beams of cedar (and) cypress, whose scent is sweet, product(s) of Mount Amanus and Mount Sirāra, the holy mountains. I fastened bands of silver and copper on doors of cedar, cypress, (and) juniper and I installed (them) in its gates.
... the men of Yakin
From Rimut-ilu, son of Nabû-šarru-uṣur.
... the 'well-being' is present.
Witness Il-immi, ...
Total, the temple steward(s).
... to ...
The money is paid completely. That garden is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... 34
Now then ...
Total, Aššur-šallim, village manager.
Total 100 horses and 10 chariots belonging to the commander-in-chief, at the disposal of Šarru-lu-dari.
... will hear and escape.
... Witness NN, cohort commander.
... the land of the Manneans, the land of the Medes, ... , the land of the Manneans, ...
... the Hubuškian(s)
From Issar-šumu-ereš.
the heart of the king ...
... Witness Sin-na'id, conscript.
... ,
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šuma-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord! The land and the forts of the king my lord are well. The king, my lord, can be glad.
On my return march, I received a substantial payment from the distant Medes, of whose land none of the kings, my ancestors, had heard mention. (Thus) I made them bow down to the yoke of my lordship. (ii 10) (As for) the Assyrians who had fled from my weapons and grasped the feet of the Medes, I had mercy on them and allowed (them) to stay with the Medes.
of the king ...
Witness Adad-ahu-...
Taboo of Aššur, my lord.
... the king, my lord
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
Witness Nabû-...
... that is why
The king's word to NN: I am well, you can be glad.
3 bags of sesame;
Witness Igilayu.
... to Marduk-apla-iddina
... and his people, NN and his people,
The kings of the land Yāʾ, the land Sūḫu, the land Mari, the land Raṣappa, the land Ḫindānu, the land Bīt-Amukāni, the land Bīt-Zualzaš, the land Bīt-Matti, the land Bīt-Amukāni, the land Bīt-Dakkūri, the land Bīt-Amukāni, the land Bīt-Dakkūri, the land Bīt-Amukāni
we ...
The land of the king is well; the forts are well. The king, my lord, can be glad.
... the palace of the succession palace ... of the land of Sumer and Akkad, the palace of the land of the Qutu, the palace of the land of the Šubaru, the palace of the land of the Yasubigallu, the palace of the land of the Ḫabḫu, the palace of the land of the Ḫamrānu, the palace of the land of the Ḫašmar, the palace of the land of the Ḫašdod, the palace of the land of the ��
Bel-duri,
May they allow you to live and get old in good health, and may they grant you the  satisfaction of old age.
... the god Marduk, the great lord,
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
In my seventh campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me and I marched to the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians, a dangerous enemy who since Tukriš (I) had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors. In the mountains, difficult terrain, I rode on horseback and had my personal chariot carried on (men’s) necks. In very rugged terrain I roamed about on foot like a wild bull.
Witness NN, scribe.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
... of the month ...
(As for) the city Adumutu, the royal city of Ullusunu, the Mannean, I conquered that city (and) I killed the people living inside it with the sword. I hung their corpses on poles and placed (them) around the city. I reorganized that district (i 55) (and) imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the gods of Assyria, my lords. I appointed Ullus
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: reliable speech; the land will become happy.
When you are to verse wine before Šamaš, you say: “Šamaš, Šamaš, ... ”
Ditto Nabû-ašared.
And afterwards, ... will come and say: "Why did you not write to me?"
Witness Riba-ahhe.
Month Iyyar (II), eponym year of Nabû-eriba, the 8th day.
of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, ...
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments...
From Balasî.
... who ... ed before me, and who is now in Assyria, has written to me: "... "
I placed at their service the former ramku-priests, pašīšu-priests, (and) ecstatics, those initiated in secret rites. I set before them purification priests, āšipu-priests, lamentation priests, (and) singers, who have mastered (their) entire craft.
I have sent my messenger to the Urarṭian, saying: "Let them come and conclude a treaty with me ...
May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May they grant the king, my lord, happiness and physical well-being!
Zer-Issar, son of Ahu-duri, his son ...
... of the town ...
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria.
... and you will give ...
in all x+3 persons, servants of NN —
Witness Šumma-Adad. Witness Ahu-kaša-uṣur.
... son of NN, son of Aya-ila'i, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of N
I had twelve gates opened up in it in four directions, in front and behind, (and) along both sides, for entering and leaving. I had a portico, a replica of a Hittite palace, constructed opposite (its) gates. I roofed it with beams of cedar (and) cypress, whose scent is sweet, product(s) of Mount Amanus and Mount Sirāra, the holy mountains.
The palace of Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II), king of Assyria, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also king of Assyria: ...
Witness Šep-Issar, servant of the governor of Arrapha.
... of the land of the Medes ... of the land of the Manneans ... of the land of the Urarṭians ... of the land of the ... of the land of the ... of the land of the ... of the land of the land of the ... of the land of the land of the land of the land of the land of the land of the land of the land of the land of the land of the land of the land of the land of the land of the land of the land of the land of the land of the land of the land of the land of the land of the land of the land of
Concerning the writing-board ...
I received gold (and) shining silver sling straps as their wrist-trappings (and) slashed off their belts with sharp swords. I took away gold (and) silver (decorated) belt-daggers as their waist-trappings.
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, chariot driver.
... of the heart
The heart of the sheep is normal. First extispicy...
... the base of the middle 'finger' of the lung is 'loose.'
The Ukkean (and) the Tabalean have been sent to the king, my lord; let the king, my lord, ask them why they came. The Ukkean has said: "I am going to the city of the king, my lord, to do obeisance to the king, my lord. I have been sent to the city of the king, my lord, by the hand of NN, the Tabalean. I have been sent to the city of the king, my lord, by the hand of NN, the Tabalean. I have been sent to the
... to ...
The 'well-being' is present. The lower part ...
a cup of quinces;
10 talents, 15 minas ...
Jupiter is the star of the Westland.
... Abi-ul-idi, ...
Puzur-Aššur, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-nārārī (I), vice-regent of the god Aššur:
... -aplu-uṣur, ...
3 ... ;
I sent (this letter) to the Palace. If it is agreeable to the Palace, let them send me a sealed order to the effect that I should bring the bull colossus to the Inner City.
The 'finger' is abnormally small...
I joyfully entered his palace, which is in Babylon, then I opened his treasury and brought out gold, silver, gold (and) silver utensils, precious stones, all kinds of possessions (and) property, a substantial treasure, (together with) his wife, his palace women, courtiers, attendants, all of the craftsmen, as many as there were, (and) his palace attendants, and I counted (them) as booty.
of the palace scribe of the succession palace.
The rams (offered) to Marduk is his blood.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, and whom Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, has taken into his entourage,
I have sent him to the king, my lord.
Tukultī-Mēr, king of the land Mari, heard about the entry of my troops, who had entered inside the land Mari, and (v 10) mustered his troops before me to wage war and battle. With the support of the god Aššur, my lord, I brought about the defeat of his troops in a widespread pitched battle. I captured alive Adinu, a nephew of Mēr, together with his troops, and I brought (them) before the god Aššur, my lord.
Afterwards, Teumman, the (very) image of a gallû-demon, sat on the throne of Urtaku. He constantly sought out evil (ways) to kill the children of Urtaku (and) the children of Ummanaldašu (Ḫumban-ḫaltaš II), the brother of Urtaku. Ummanigaš, Ummanappa, (and) Tammarītu — the sons of Urtaku, the king of the land Elam — Kudurru (and) Parrû — (iv 35) (s
Witness Hubašate.
My battle troops (who are stationed) in the city Mangisu — which is inside (the territory of) the city Sumandir —
... to the king ...
... they will plunder
I entered the city of Tyre and I killed the people living inside it, as many as had sided with them and plotted evil (deeds) against the Assyrians. I hung their corpses on poles and placed (them) around the city. I reorganized that district (i 55) (and) imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the god Aššur, my lord.
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
a basket of (mixed) fruit.
Zizî,
... the palace herald
An estate of 1 hectare of land adjoining Mannu-ki-Arbail, adjoining the wadi of Šamaš-naṣir,
from the 20th day of this month ...
... I sent ... to the chief eunuch, my lord. The chief eunuch, my lord, ... ed the ... s of the palace scribe. The palace scribe ... ed the ... s of the chief eunuch, my lord.
... is ...
... An estate of 1 hectare of land adjoining the road of Calah.
... to ... , and they are bringing ... to me.
If Venus in Ab (V) descends darkly to the horizon and sets: there will be rains and floods, and the harvest of the land will prosper.
of days ...
NN, the eunuch of Aššur-aplu-uṣur, the governor of the city of Dur-Šarruken, has written to me: "The king of Elam has written to the king of Assyria: 'The king of Assyria is marching against me. You, however, should not be afraid of him.'"
... the land of the brothers
To the king, my lord: your servant Gabbu-ana-Aššur.
Land of the Palace Herald
The king, my lord, should ... his servants.
Witness ... ayu.
... Aššur-šarru-uṣur, Babylon
1 seah 1 'litre' of regular offering loaves;
... Venus and Saturn
Nabû-remanni, his wife, ... , son of NN, ...
an estate of 1 hectare of land adjoining the road of Bit-abi-ili,
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Month Iyyar (II), 5th day, eponym year of Banbâ.
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
Month of Ea-šarru (VI), eponym year of Nabû-ila'i.
Witness Nabû-zeru-lešir.
To the king, my lord: your servant Mannu-ki-Arbail. Good health to the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
I sent (this order) to the Urarṭian, but he did not agree to bring the people to me, but said: "I will not give them to you without the permission of the king, my lord." I am now writing to the king, my lord: let the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, changed or altered the proceedings, or jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
... the Itu'eans
of their words ...
20 cows of milk;
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: reliable speech; the land will become happy.
... the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me and I marched to the land of the Medes, a dangerous enemy. In the high mountains, difficult terrain, I rode on horseback and had my personal chariot carried on (men’s) necks. In very rugged terrain I roamed about on foot like a wild bull.
Now then I am sending to the king, my lord, the ... of the king, my lord.
May a later prince restore my inscribed name to its place. (Then) the goddess Ištar will listen to his prayers.
When the king, my lord, was staying overnight in the city of Akkad, I was staying in the city of Akkad. The king, my lord, gave me the following order: "You will not leave Akkad until I have left and entered Babylon."
I have not seen a single ... of the king, my lord, since the king, my lord, went to Elam. The king, my lord, should not say: "Why did you not write to me?"
... the king of the land ...
The troops of the Medes, who are in the district of Mannea, have been defeated on the border of Mannea. The king, my lord, should know (this).
From Nabû-ahhe-eriba.
I had a bridge constructed opposite the Citadel Gate (by packing down) paving stones of white limestone for my lordly processions. I had bull colossi and sphinxes of white limestone created in the territory of the city Balāṭāya and their forms perfected through the craft of the deity Ninkura.
... of the son of Abu-ila'i
... minas ...
As to Bel-šarru-uṣur, Nabû-uṣalli, and Nergal-uṣalli, the sons of Nabû-uṣalli, the sons of Nabû-uṣalli, the sons of Nabû-uṣalli, the sons of Nabû-uṣalli, the sons of Nabû-uṣalli, the sons of Nabû-uṣalli, the sons of Nabû-uṣalli, the sons of Nabû-uṣalli, the
... of the king
owner of the vine being sold.
with Aššur-iddina ...
Ubru-...
If the king, my lord, commands: "The horses should stay with the chariot." Then let the king, my lord, command that they should be hitched up and stand by.
Witness Issar-lu-dari.
If a planet comes near the Anzu star: the king of Akkad will die, and Adad will devastate.
Moreover, I struck with the sword Teušpa, a Cimmerian, together with his entire army, in the territory of the land Ḫubušna; I conquered Išpabāra, a Scythian, together with his entire army, in the territory of the city Gagal; I conquered Ullusunu, a Mannean, together with his entire army, in the territory of the city Izirtu; I conquered Ullusunu, a Mannean, together with his entire army, in the territory of the city Izirt
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
... the people of Assyria ...
The palace of Tiglath-pileser, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (I), king of Assyria, son of Mutakkil-Nusku (who was) also king of Assyria: booty of the land of the Kassites.
Aya-saggî, the chief of granaries, has told me: "The king has given me 100 homers of wheat and 100 homers of wine. I have received it, but  the king has not yet given me the rest of the wheat and the wine."
The middle of the 'path' is effaced.
... ,
... -šarru-isse'a
... Ahu-duri
... the 'path' is curled...
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Eltekeh (and) Tamnâ. I approached the city Ekron and I killed the governors (and) nobles who had committed crime(s) and hung their corpses on towers around the city; I counted the citizens who had committed (iii 10) the criminal acts as booty; (and) I commanded that the rest of them, (those) who were not guilty of crimes or wrongdoing, (to) whom no penalty was due, be allowed to go free.
May Nergal, the strongest among the gods, destroy his people through plague and pestilence, and may he uproot him from the land of his enemy. May he bring about the defeat of his army in the thick of battle.
1 ... of the palace herald;
I have sent my messenger to Marduk-apla-iddina.
2 sheep, 1 bowl (of wine):
Witness ... -abu, eunuch of the city ...
Month of Elul (VI), 13th day.
Now then I have sent to the king, my lord, two messengers of the king of Elam. Let the king, my lord, question them.
And as to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let the son of Yakin come and stay with you, and let him do the work with you" —
I put my yoked teams in order. I took the road to the land Ellipi, a district in the mountains. Before my arrival, Ispabāra, their king, abandoned his fortified cities (and) his treasury and fled far away. I overwhelmed all of his wide land like a fog. I surrounded, conquered, destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire the cities Marʾubištu (and) Akkuddu, cities of his royal house, together with thirty small(er) settlements in their environs. I brought out of them people, young
To the king, my lord: your servant, Aššur-belu-taqqin. Good health to the king, my lord. May Aššur, Šamaš, Marduk, Zarpanitu, Nabû, Tašmetu, Ištar of Nineveh and Ištar of Arbela — these great gods who love your kingship — allow the king, my lord, to live 100 years.
Now, if you say: "I will not give ... to the son of NN," then I will not give it to the son of NN. If you say: "I will not give ... to the son of NN," then I will not give it to the son of NN. If you say: "I will not give ... to the son of NN," then I will not give it to the son of NN.
In the month of ... , on the 1st day, I went to ... and saw the ... of the people of the land of ... ; on the 2nd day I went to ... and saw the ... of the people of the land of ... ; on the 3rd day I went to ... and saw the ... of the people of the land of ...
... of wine
Silver, gold, precious stones, all kinds of possessions (and) property, a substantial treasure, (together with) his wife, his palace women, courtiers, attendants, all of the craftsmen, as many as there were, (and) his palace attendants, who were more numerous than locusts — I carried (all of these things) off to Assyria. I brought his palace women, his courtiers, (and) his attendants, together with a substantial treasure, to Nineveh, my capital city, and I had (them) occupy (their)
The money is paid completely. Those fields, houses, gardens and people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
As to the merchants of whom you wrote, I have sent them to the Palace. They will bring the merchants to you.
... 1/2 ditto;
The 'well-being' is present. There are 2 'paths.' The left of the gall bladder is attached. The base of the middle part is 'loose.' The base of the lower part is 'loose.'
Witness NN, from Nineveh.
Bel-duri,
... you have not sent ...
... to them ...
(As for) the citizens of (the cities) Sais, Mendes, (and) Tanis, who had rebelled against Taharqa and sided with Taharqa, I conquered those cities (and) I killed the people living inside them with the sword. I hung their corpses on poles and placed (them) around the city wall. I reorganized those cities (and) I imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the god Ašš
From Ašaredu the older.
... the king, my lord, ...
The chariot-driver ... has ... ed the chariot of the ... , saying: "I'll go to the town of the ... eans."
... of the god Marduk, the great lord ...
Witness ...
... the deputy
When the chief eunuch of Assyria, Aššur-šarru-uṣur, goes to his fate in my palace with a good repute, they shall bury him where he dictates, and he  shall lie where it was his wish. Where he lies you shall not disturb  him, and you shall not raise your hand against him, to do him evil, because he is one who has deserved kindness and favour of the king his lord.
... the vertebrae ...
adjoining the field of Šulmu-beli-lamur, ...
... ,
The palace of ... -ibni.
I, Šamaš-rēša-uṣur, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Shalmaneser (III), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also great king, strong king, king of the world, (and) king of Assyria; the one who
To the king, my lord: your servant Bel-le'i. Good health to the king, my lord!
let him ...
... the goddess Ištar of Uruk, the Lady of Babylon, the Lady of Der, the Lady of Akkad, the Lady of the Step Gate, the Lady of the House, the Lady of the House of the Mountain, the Lady of the House of the Mountain, the Lady of the House of the Mountain, the Lady of the House of the Mountain, the Lady of the House of the Mountain, the Lady of the House of the Mountain, the Lady of the House of the Mountain, the Lady of the House of the Mountain, the Lady of the House of the Mountain, the Lady of the
To Aššur-šumu-uṣur, the king, my lord: your servant ...
Witness Šulmu-šarri.
1 bag of sesame;
500 rams, 1 ...
Witness Šulmu-ereš, merchant.
I marched to Mount Lebanon. I cut down (and) carried off cedar beams for the temple of the god Aššur, my lord. I continued to the land Amurru (and) conquered the entire land Amurru. I received tribute from the lands Byblos, Sidon, (and) Bīt-Zitti. I received tribute from the land Arwad. I received tribute from the land Ḫatti. I received tribute from the land Bīt-Ammon. I received tribute from the land Moab.
Witness Banî, deputy of the palace scribe.
(The name of) the city is: “The city that is the desired object of the gods.”
Witness Ubru-Nabû, son of Nabû-naṣir.
... of the 'finger.'
we ...
Witness Zarutî, chariot driver of the crown prince.
with Bani-...
... let him do.
20 ... of the merchant ...
The breast-bone is thick. The lower part is elevated.
... of the goddess Ištar
100 horses, 10 chariot drivers, 10 chariot fighters, 30 grooms of the teams, 30 chariot fighters, 30 chariot fighters, 30 chariot fighters, 30 chariot fighters, 30 chariot fighters, 30 chariot fighters, 30 chariot fighters, 30 chariot fighters, 30 chariot fighters, 30 chariot fighters, 30 chariot fighters, 30 chariot fighters, 30 chariot fighters, 30 chariot fighters,
a 2-seah jar of Assyrian budê-confection;
... I have set
... the great gods in their assembly
... 5 Babylonians
... of wine
Total 2: the Arabs.
... to the king ...
... the land
I have not seen ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... the town of the Šamaš Gate
... the palace of the city Dur-Šarruken.
... s of Elam ...
... my sons to ...
A vacant lot adjoining the road of the wadi of the town of the bakers,
Now, if it is acceptable to the king, my lord, let the king, my lord, command that they should be shown a house in Nineveh and live there, and let me send my domestics of foreign origin, who were settled in Elam, to live with them, and may the(ir) exile come to an end.
... &  beer  &  total, 100.
Moreover, breccia, as much as is needed (for making) burzigallu-bowls,
Mars is the star of the Westland; evil for the Westland and Elam.
Witness Šulmu-na'id, ditto.
In the future may a later prince, when that temple becomes dilapidated and he renovates (it), anoint my monumental inscriptions with oil, make a sacrifice, and return (them) to their places. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
(As to) the ... of the Itu'eans of whom the king, my lord, wrote me: "Send (word) that they should be brought to me!" —
total, the work of ...
... of ...
... son of Yakin ...
The goddess Ištar who resides in the city Arbela, who is clothed in fire (and) cloaked in awe-inspiring radiance, who rains down fire upon the land of the enemy, who burns the cities of the enemy, who dwells in Eanna, the lady of battle, who goes at the side of the king, her favorite, and slays his foes, who dwells in Eanna, which is laden with sexual charm, and which is filled with awe-inspiring radiance —
the town of Il...
Witness Abi-ana-...
To the king, my lord: your servant Issar-šumu-ereš. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the subject of this query, Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, should ...
an estate of 1 hectare of land adjoining Nabû-eriba, adjoining the road of the wadi of Issete, adjoining the road of the wadi of the town of the bakers,
If a fog rolls on a cloudy day: fall of Elam.
Land of the Manneans
1 seah 1 'litre' of spiced bread;
From Ea-šarru-ibni.
... who in my heart
The servants of Bel-ahhe-šallim, the son of the king, my lord, who came to me, saying: "Let us ... to the king, my lord, and let us ... to the king, my lord," — I have now written to the king, my lord, what they said to me.
I took the city Elenzaš as a royal city and a fortress for that district, then I changed its former name and called it Kār-Sennacherib. I settled therein the people of the lands that I had conquered. I placed (it) under the authority of a eunuch of mine, the governor of the city Ḫarḫar, and (thus) enlarged my land.
I engraved on slabs of breccia (and) alabaster, and on large limestone slabs (images of) the enemy settlements that I had conquered. I surrounded their (the palace rooms’) lower courses (with them and) made (them) an object of wonder.
1, eunuchs of the governor of Arrapha;
Witness Šamaš-ahu-iddina, physician.
a cup of small onions; a cup of quinces;
Now then I am sending to the king, my lord, Nabû-uṣalla, the bodyguard. Let the king, my lord, question him.
I have now written to you: Do not be negligent but attentive!
... they are
The city of the governor of Arrapha.
Month Iyyar (II), 2nd day, eponym year of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, governor of Marqasa.
As to what you wrote: "I have sent my messenger to Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II) concerning these matters. He did not agree to what I wrote to him, but said: 'I will not agree to anything without the permission of the king. I will write to the king, my lord, whatever news there is.'
If the earth quakes at night: the king of the land will die, and his son will seize the throne; the king of the land will die, and his son will seize the throne.
400, the treasurer of the silver;
From Bel-šuma-iškun.
Now, what is it that the king, my lord, orders?
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-reṣuwa. Good health to the king, my lord!
Se'-... , son of NN, a servant of NN, the son of NN, and of NN, a servant of NN —
at the disposal of ...
I have now written to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
11 houses ...
the governor of ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "The son of the king of Elam ...
... I built (and) completed that temple from its foundation(s) to its crenellations.
An estate of 3 hectares of land belonging to Bahianu,
what I have given ...
Witness Nabû-aplu-iddina, ...
... the land of the Medes ...
from ...
Month ... , 10th day, eponym year of Aššur-ila'i, commander-in-chief.
... who is placed before Šamaš, is Marduk, when he trampled the necks of his enemies.
Aššur, Šamaš, ... , Aššur-Enlil, Ašra-killa, Šamaš-killa, Ašra-killa, Šamaš-killa, Ašra-killa, Šamaš-killa, Ašra-killa, Šamaš-killa, Ašra-killa, Šamaš-killa, Ašra-killa, Šamaš-killa, Ašra-killa, Šamaš-killa, Ašra-killa, Šamaš
I have written ...
Witness NN, architect.
Seal of Sasî, owner of the ... being sold.
Palace of Tiglath-pileser (III), great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dān (II), mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (II), mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rabi (II) (who was) also mighty king, king of the world, (and) king of Assyria.
Yahalu, his son, adolescent; 1 woman: a total of 5 people.
... the temple of the Assyrian Ištar
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
The palace of Aššur-dān, king of the universe, son of Tiglath-pileser (II), king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (II), (who was) also king of Assyria: booty of the land of the people of the city Ḫindānu.
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord! May the king, my lord, ... his enemies!
If a planet comes near the top of the moon and stands there: the king of Assyria will exercise complete dominion; his land will submit to him.
... him ...
... to the son of NN
before us ...
... of the bed ...
May the Lady of Babylon, who is clothed in fire, burn up his country!
I set Šarru-lū-dāri, son of Rūkibtu, their former king, over the people of the city Ashkelon and imposed upon him the payment of tribute (and) gifts (in recognition) of my overlordship so that he (now) pulls my yoke.
Disregard that the subject of this query, Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, ...
At that time, by the command of the god Aššur, my lord, I marched to the land of the Medes, a dangerous enemy. In the high mountains, difficult terrain, I rode on horseback and had my personal chariot carried on (men’s) necks. In very rugged terrain I roamed about on foot like a wild bull.
— It is seen with the sun.
The woman Šumma-ilani is placed as a pledge.
... the vizier
Total, 100, in the charge of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, eunuch of the crown prince.
The baker, the brewer, the confectioner, the baker of the House of Aššur, the baker of the House of Šamaš, the baker of the House of Bel-šarru, the baker of the House of Nabû, the baker of the House of Nergal, the baker of the House of La-adiru-ili, the baker of the House of Zababa, the baker of the House of Ištar, the baker of the House of Šarrat-nipha, the baker of the
Witness NN, ...
From ... aya.
... the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ... , the god ...
... of Urad-Gula ...
... and his people,
Ashur-mukin-paleya,
Tablet of Šamaš-šumu-ukin to the king, his lord.
Witness Dagan-milki, ditto.
The gall bladder is flattened. The 'finger' is thick. The 'yoke' is present...
... the land of Akkad ... the merchant
Witness Nergal-šallim, horse trainer of the open chariotry.
If the moon is surrounded by a river: there will be great floods and cloudbreaks.
On the 10th of Tammuz (IV), I shall be in the city of Aššur. I shall spend the night in the city of Aššur on the 11th and on the 12th. I shall spend the night in the city of Aššur on the 13th and on the 14th.
... the city of Aššur
On the day that ... , the king ... the land of Akkad ...
... the heart
If Jupiter becomes visible in the path of the moon: the king of Akkad will die, and there will be hostility in the land.
And in the city of Akkad, which ...
Moreover, the king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the governor of Arrapha. I have no fields, no houses, no servants, no oxen, no sheep, no wine, no oil, no honey, no ghee, no cedar resin, no juniper, no ...
And concerning the work on the fort in Dur-Šarruken, about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Do the work!" — I have done the work. I have built the fort and deposited my monumental inscription.
May a later prince restore my inscribed name to its place. (Then) the goddess Ištar will listen to his prayers.
15 whole sheep;
... to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should know (this).
If a planet comes near the top of the moon and stands there: the king of the land will exercise complete dominion.
... to Assyria ...
... the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city of ... , the city
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Nabû-ahu-iddina or his sons or his brothers or his nephews, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Bel-duri and his sons,
Concerning the work on the river ...
... I have sent ... to the king, my lord.
An estate of 1 hectare of land adjoining the road of Calah, the side road of the village of Zizî, and the side road of the village of Zizî; an estate of 1 hectare of land adjoining the side road of the village of Zizî and the side road of the village of Zizî;
Witness Qurdi-Aššur, son of Nabû-eriba.
From Nergal-eṭir.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Write to the Palace that they should bring the tribute" —
The king's subjects who are the shepherds of the  king's subjects, the prefects, the recruitment officers, the  chariot drivers, the chariot fighters, the cavalrymen and the  archers,
If a planet comes near the front of the moon and stands there, and the king my lord commands: "Let a eunuch of mine go and see it," let him go and see it, and let him report to the king, my lord, whatever he sees and hears.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
“Why ...
Witness Bel-...
Witness Šulmu-šarri, royal bodyguard.
Nabû-zeru-ibni, the eunuch of NN, has been staying in the presence of the king, my lord, and has been telling the king, my lord: "The ... s of the Inner City are plotting to kill me." The king, my lord, should ask Nabû-zeru-ibni whether or not this is true. If it is true, the king, my lord, should know (about it). If not, the king, my lord, should know that Nabû-zeru-ibni is a liar.
... they are bringing
Ditto by Gula and Pabilsag!
and we will give it to the king.
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the four quarters (of the world), king of the eight mountains, king of the extensive mountains, king of the four quarters (of the world), king of the eight mountain regions, king of the extensive mountains, king of the eight mountain regions, king of the four quarters (of the world), king of the eight mountain regions, king of the extensive mountains, king of the four quarters (of the world), king of the eight mountain regions, king of the extensive mountains, king of the four quarters (of the world), king of the eight mountain regions
If the moon is surrounded by a halo, and two stars stand in the halo with the moon: a reign of long days.
From the beginning of my reign until my seventeenth palû, I conquered the lands of the Šubaru, the Qutu, the land of the Šubaru, the land of the Šubaru, the land of the Šubaru, the land of the Šubaru, the land of the Šubaru, the land of the Šubaru, the land of the Šubaru, the land of the Šubaru, the land of the Šubaru, the land of the Šubaru, the land of the Šubaru, the land of the Šubaru, the land of
1 prayer bowl ditto;
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. The very  best of health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the  king, my lord! May Aššur, Sin, Šamaš, Adad, Ištar of Nineveh  and Ištar of Arbela give long lasting days, everlasting years, happiness and joy to the king, my lord!
Witness NN, commander-of-fifty.
1,000 (homers) of wheat ...
Ashur-ila'i, gardener; 1 son; 1 woman; 10 hectares of arable land; 1 house.
The eclipse which took place in the reign of ... , king of Assyria,
at the disposal of Mušallim-Issar.
10 ditto, small;
(As for) Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II), the king of the land Elam, he heard about the entry of my troops, who had entered inside the land Elam; he abandoned the city Madaktu, a royal city of his, and (then) fled and took to the mountains (lit. “ascended his mountain”).
The king, my lord, can be glad.
... of the bed which is in
2 hectares of land in the town of Uqimutaya, adjoining the road of the town of Uqimutaya and the road to the town of Uqimutaya;
If there is a 'weapon'-mark on the left of the 'finger' and it faces upward: the enemy will attack, but will not succeed.
... I made him take an oath and ... his land ... I gave him the following order: "... the land of ... and ... the land of ... !"
Witness Šulmu-ahhe, ditto.
Month Elul (VI), 11th day, eponym year of Sennacherib, king of Assyria.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
... the land of the people of ... , the land of the people of ... , the land of the people of ... , the land of the people of ... , the land of the people of ... , the land of the people of ... , the land of the people of ... , the land of the people of ... , the land of the people of ... , the land of the people of ... , the land of the people of ... , the land of the people of ... , the land of the people of ... , the land of the people of ... , the land of the people of ... , the land of the people of ...
... he
Witness Šulmu-šarri, scribe.
... of ...
... he ...
If the earth quakes at night: worry for the land, variant: abandonment of the land.
the town of the palace ...
A tablet of Nabû-eriba to the king, my lord.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments...
If you should sin against this treaty of Aššur-nerari, king of Assyria, and the great gods, and if you should not guard this treaty of Aššur-nerari, king of Assyria, and the great gods, your lords, and if you should remove the ... of Assyria from the territory of Assyria and the territory of its vassals, and if you should not guard the treaty of Aššur-nerari, king of Assyria, and the great gods, your lords,
Witness Nergal-ahu-uṣur, commander-of-fifty of ...
of the Itu'eans ...
... the house of ...
300,000 sheep;
the governor of ...
... the king, my lord
... of the king ...
1 hectare, ditto, ditto, Šamaš-abu'a;
At that time, the palace of the kings, my ancestors, which the kings who preceded me had previously built — that palace had become old, dilapidated, and had collapsed. I removed its debris, renovated it, restored it, and deposited my monumental inscription. I deposited my monumental inscription with the monumental inscriptions of the kings, my ancestors, and deposited my monumental inscription with them.
The son of Yakin has written to the son of Ibâ:
... -ibni
... of the land of the Palace Herald
10 ...
... of the land of Akkad
We have not yet received the rest of the tribute. As soon as we have received it, we shall write to the king, our lord.
The eunuchs and the bearded courtiers eat bread under the king's protection.
of the Urarṭian ...
... is his ...
5 sheep, 2 ducks, 1 spring lamb;
... the land of the Arabs ... the land of the Arabs ... the land of the Arabs ... the land of the Arabs ... the land of the Arabs ... the land of the Arabs ... the land of the Arabs ... the land of the Arabs ... the land of the Arabs ... the land of the Arabs ... the land of the Arabs ... the land of the Arabs ... the land of the Arabs ... the land of the Arabs ... the land of the Arabs ... the land of the Arabs ... the land of the Arabs ... the land of the Arabs ... the
... of Marduk-apla-iddina
The day that the king, my lord, sent me to the Palace, I was told to bring the people of the Palace to the Inner City, and I did so. Now, if it pleases the king, my lord, let them bring them to the Inner City, and let me bring the people of the Inner City to the Palace.
We have not yet received the horses, but as soon as we have received them, we shall write to the king, our lord, whatever news there is.
... of the land of the Medes, of the land of the Manneans, of the land of the ... , of the land of the Urarṭians, of the land of the ... , of the land of the ... , of the land of the Ulluba, of the land of the ... , of the land of the Ulluba, of the land of the Ulluba, of the land of the Ulluba, of the land of the Ulluba, of the land of the Ulluba, of the land of the Ulluba, of the land of the Ulluba,
And afterwards, when the king of Elam had heard that the king of Assyria had marched against the king of Elam, he mustered his troops and ... to ...
... the city of the land of the Bīt-Yakīn, which is in the district of the land of the Bīt-Yakīn, which is in the middle of the Euphrates River,
I have been told that the son of the king of Elam has been killed. The king of Elam has been in the presence of the king of ... , and the king of Elam has been in the presence of the king of ... , and the king of Elam has been in the presence of the king of the land of the Medes.
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, king of the world, king of Assyria.
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also great king, strong king, king of the world, (and) king of Assyria.
adjoining the field of NN,
... and ... in the land of Akkad, and the rest of the people of the land of Akkad
I have sent ...
Witness Ninuayu, ...
I ...
Total 19 gods of the house of Nabû.
Witness Aplu-iddina.
a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
I have written to you; do not neglect to guard the watch over the city of Dur-Šarruken.
... -apli, royal bodyguard;
Concerning the eclipse of the moon about which you wrote,
From Nabû-šuma-iškun.
Total, in the charge of Yabaya.
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
Witness Nabû-eriba, cook.
On my return march, I received a substantial payment from the distant Medes, of whose land none of the kings, my ancestors, had heard mention. (Thus) I made them bow down to the yoke of my lordship. (ii 10) (As for) the Assyrians who had fled from my weapons and had taken refuge (ii 15) in the land of the Medes, I killed (and) plundered (them). Moreover, I cut off (ii 20) the head of Teumman, the (very) image of a gallû-
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šuma-lišir. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May the great gods bestow long days, well-being and joy upon the king, my lord!
... Aššur-šumu-uṣur
May Girra, who gives birth to small and great, burn up your name and your seed.
Shalmaneser, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil and vice-regent of Aššur:
... of the goddess Ištar
If the Pleiades enter the moon and come out to the back of the moon: Akkad will see plenty; the king of Akkad will exercise complete dominion.
and the dream ...
Witness Apladadad-...
Nabonidus, king of Babylon, the one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, the one who is assiduous towards the rites of the great gods, am I — (As for) Nabopolassar, the king who had come before me, the one who had disturbed the rites of the great gods, (and) the one who had discontinued the regular offerings of Esagil and Ezida, I had him (Nabopolassar) brought into Babylon bound with a bear (and) a dog.
5 minas of silver, 5 togas, 5 tunics, 2 tunics of red wool, 10 togas of red wool, 10 togas of black wool, 10 togas of white wool, 10 togas of grey wool, 10 togas of black wool, 10 togas of red wool, 10 togas of black wool, 10 togas of white wool, 10 togas of grey wool, 10 togas of black wool, 10 togas of red wool, 10 to
If you hear of a plot to kill, kill, or take away the life of Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, and his brothers, and if you know that it is a plot to kill, kill, or take away the life of Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, and his brothers, you shall not conceal it but will report it to Esarhaddon, your lord.
If the palace scribe has a son, a son of his brother, or a son of his nephew, and he has them serve in the palace, the palace scribe will die.
1 talent of ... for 1 ...
Total 6 horses — Arbailayu.
Total, 100 horses, 10 mules, x donkeys, x camels,
Now then I am sending to you my messenger. Let him come and see you.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-šar-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord!
the work ...
which NN ...
... I have sent ... to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, may do as he deems best.
... came
saying: "Why ...
The people of the land of Akkad ...
The money is paid completely. That land is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
an estate of 3 decares adjoining the road of Calah, the side road of Calah, and the side road of the village of the bakers;
Witness Šamaš-šallim, ...
If the king, my lord, commands: "Let them bring the tribute of the Urarṭians to me."
... the 'station' is present...
... Bel-ereš ...
... to the king ...
The 'cavity' of the left lung is split.
The 30th day, which they call the Silence, is when he vanquished Anu and the Pleiades, the sons of Enmešarra.
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-alik-pani. Good health to the king, my lord!
As to what you wrote: "I have sent my messenger to Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II) regarding these matters. He did not agree to send a reply to my word(s), but said: 'I will not write to you without the permission of the king'" — now, if you have not sent your messenger to Ummanigaš, the king, your lord, should know (this).
2 cedar beams, for the brazier.
Month of Shebat (XI), 5th day, eponym year of Dadî-iqbi,
... the gods of Nabû-ahhe-šallim, the ...
Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, I: ...
The breast-bone.
Urad-Ea, servant of Ahu-duri.
... from the beginning of ...
... to the land of the Medes, ... of the land of the Medes, ... of the land of the Medes, ... of the land of the Medes, ... of the land of the Medes, ... of the land of the Medes, ... of the land of the Medes, ... of the land of the Medes, ... of the land of the Medes, ... of the land of the Medes, ... of the land of the Medes, ... of the land of the Medes, ... of the land of the Medes, ... of the land of the Medes, ... of
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
3 cans of beer;
Witness Šarru-lu-dari.
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial payment from the distant Medes, of whose land none of the kings, my ancestors, had heard mention. (Thus) I made them bow down to the yoke of my lordship. (ii 10) (As for) the people of the land Ellipi, a district in the area of the salt desert, which is in the midst of the land of the distant Medes, and (whose location) is remote, (and) upon the soil of whose land none of the kings, my ancestors, had walked, I carried off to Ass
in the city ...
10 minas of silver, 10 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish, belonging to Aššur-šallim, at the disposal of Nabû-šumu-iddina, son of Nabû-šumu-iddina, at the disposal of Nabû-šumu-iddina, son of Nabû-šumu-iddina.
Total, 1 horse, 5 mules, 1 donkey, 1 camel, 10 oxen, 100 sheep, 10 ducks, 10 ...
with ...
Witness NN, scribe of the crown prince.
To the goddess Ištar of Uruk, lady of the lands: Ashurbanipal, king of the four quarters (of the world), son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also king of Assyria, dedicated (this) for his life, the prolongation of his days, his happiness, his health, and his life’s duration.
If ... stands in the halo of the moon: the moon god will make an incursion against the enemy; ... will be shut up; the king of Elam will die; ... will be shut up.
... this ...
NN, 11 oxen,
The great gods in their assembly determined a favorable destiny as my lot and
(As for) the one who destroys an inscribed object bearing my name, the name of my father, the name of my grandfather, (and) the name of my brothers, may the great gods of heaven and netherworld overthrow his kingship (and) make his name (and) seed disappear from the land. May they have no pity on him forever.
... to the king, my lord.
May Anu and Antu, the great gods, by their command of the great gods, destroy, devastate, (and) burn with fire the cities of Assyria, and may they turn (them) into a mound of ruins (lit. “a mound and ruins”).
2 minas of silver, of the work-quota.
I have sent ...
of the forts ...
17 donkey stallions:
Witness Abda', ša-šepi guard.
I conquered the people of the land Bīt-Dakkūri, who live in the mountains. I took away from them their cities, their land, and their gods, and I brought (them) to Assyria. I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire their cities. I turned (them) into a mound of ruins (lit. “a mound and ruins”).
— The new corps of Sennacherib.
... to Assyria ...
(As for) the one who erases my inscribed name or the name of my favorite brother by some crafty device, may the great gods of heaven and netherworld overthrow his kingship ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šarru-emuranni. Good health to the king, my lord!
I brought out Padî, their king, from the city Jerusalem and placed (him) on the lordly throne over them, then I imposed upon him payment (in recognition) of my overlordship.
Šulmu-beli-lamur, son of Abi-yaqiya, a servant of the king of Elam, has written to me: "The king of Elam has sent me to ... "
The god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises.
... I have written ...
... Ubru-...
... of the bed ...
Ashurnasirpal, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of Aššur; the one who has revered the great gods, the one who has extolled their might, the one who has glorified
... the god
the sons of Puqudu ...
... the bow ...
Witness La-tubaššanni-Daddî.
... the bed ...
Witness Banî.
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, then I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made him (lit. “his land”) bow down to the yoke of my lordship. I imposed upon him hostages, tribute, and payment, and imposed upon him the obligation to deliver up the remainder of the audience gift(s) of the god Bēl (Marduk) and the goddess Zarpanītu, the gifts (us
When the king, my lord, was staying overnight in ... , I was staying in the palace. The king, my lord, gave me the following order: "You will stay in the palace until I have finished the work on the temple."
Saturn is the star of the Westland.
If the Wolf star is red: the people will rage.
Nergal-nirka-da''in, son of Aššur-nirka-da''in, servant of Šamaš-šumu-ukin, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, who is now ill and on whom the 'hand' of Nanaya of Uruk is being placed in extispicy —
... red wool;
Venus is the star of the Westland.
The vertebrae are recessed. A rib of the right ...
... the goddess Ištar of Uruk, the Lady of Babylon, the Lady of Der, the Lady of Akkad, the Lady of Nineveh, the Lady of the Step Gate, the Lady of the House of Succession, the Lady of the House of Succession, the Lady of the House of Succession, the Lady of the House of Succession, the Lady of the House of Succession, the Lady of the House of Succession, the Lady of the House of Succession, the Lady of the House of Succession, the Lady of the House of Succession, the Lady of
and ... to him.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
The king, my lord, knows that I am a poor man, that I have no oxen and no sheep. I have no house, no land, no orchard, no vegetable garden, no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ...
Witness ... -aplu-...
The king, my lord, can be glad.
to the rest of the country ...
Because of the evil that Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, (my) hostile brother, had done to me, I had no pity for him and did not want to see him alive. I sent my warriors to the land of the Medes, his allies, and they brought about his defeat. They captured him alive (and) brought him before me. I had no pity for him and did not want to see him alive. I sent my warriors to the land of the Medes, his allies, and they brought about his defeat. They captured him alive and brought him before me.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-iqbi. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
On the 10th day, when you are to strew salt on cooked meat before Belat-dunani, you say: “May Igigi, the gods of heaven, and Anunnaki, the gods of earth, accept and listen!”
Ashurnasirpal, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of Aššur:
and ...
... who is in the presence of the king, my lord, ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Balasî. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Witness Nabû-eriba, ditto.
Witness Hannanayu, tailor.
4 cans of ... ;
3 of 2 spans' height;
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Šamaš-šumu-ukin.
I took away the kingship of Lulî, the king of the city Sidon. I placed Tu-Baʾlu on his throne and imposed upon him payment (in recognition) of my overlordship.
Seal of Adad-ahu-iddina, owner of the people being sold.
He shall pay in the month of Tishri (VII). If he does not pay, it shall increase by a fourth.
I have not seen ...
saying: "...
A tablet of Bel-ila'i to the Palace Scribe. Good health to the Palace Scribe!
Now then ... , and I am sending ... to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
... Mannu-ki-...
... I placed ... in his hands. I appointed ... over the land of the Bīt-Yakīn. I imposed upon him hostages, tribute, and payment(s). I made him (the king of the land of the Bīt-Yakīn) bow down to my yoke.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... the ... of the son of NN ... " — I have sent ... to the son of NN. If he comes, let the king, my lord, ask him: "Did I not send you ... ? Why did he not come?"
Remanni-Adad, chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, has contracted and bought from these men for 10 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish. He has bought and acquired (said property) from them. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The palace of Aššur-nārārī, king of the universe, son of Išme-Dagan (II), king of Assyria, son of Aššur-nārārī (II), (who was) also king of Assyria: booty of the city Ḫindānu.
... of the king, my lord ...
Now then I am sending to the king, my lord, the letter which I sent to the king, my lord, via Šamaš-bunaya.
I have received 300 horses from the town of Ulušia. I have received 100 horses from the town of Ulušia. I have received 100 horses from the town of Ulušia. I have received 100 horses from the town of Ulušia. I have received 100 horses from the town of Ulušia.
Isana               Isana
Aya-rāmu, son of Teʾri, who was appointed by Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, as a bishop in the service of the god Aššur, and who was installed as a bishop in the temple of the god Aššur, your god, and who has been serving in the temple of the god Aššur, your god, for the past 11 years,
... the king, my lord
If the rising of Enmešarra is seen early: the harvest of the land will prosper; ... will be abundant.
If Venus becomes visible in Kislev (IX): the king of the land will die.
Total 7 of NN.
Total 6 women.
... the king, my lord
of the king of ...
... of the temple of the Lady of Babylon ...
Witness Ubru-... , mayor of Calah.
to ...
... came ...
Now, if you say: "I want to go to the aid of the Assyrians," then go and help them. If not, then do not go to the aid of the Assyrians, but do everything possible to make them hateful to you even more hateful.
I had a bridge constructed opposite the Citadel Gate by packing down paving stones of white limestone for my lordly processions.
... Now then
The 'well-being' is present. The 'path' is present.
... -duri, his people; Dadî, his people; NN, his people;
The ... of the palace scribe ... has written to the king, my lord: "The king, my lord, should know (about this)."
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial payment from the distant Medes, of whose land none of the kings, my ancestors, had heard mention. (Thus) I made them bow down to the yoke of my lordship.
... a jar of wine ...
The chariot which goes to the Akitu House and comes back has no driver.
... s of NN of the ...
The one who (re)constructed the temple of the god Aššur, the great lord, my lord; the one who (re)built Esagil and Babylon, renovated the statues of the great gods, (and) who returned the plundered gods of the lands to their (proper) place from the city Aššur; the one who (re)confirmed sattukku (and) ginû offerings in them; the one who (re)confirmed the regular offerings (in them); the one who (re)confirmed the offerings (
... the 'outside.'
... will ...
... I mustered my troops (and) took the direct road against Uaiteʾ (Iautaʾ), the king of the land of the Arabs. (vii 10) I crossed over the land of the land of the Bīt-Yakīn, which is in the midst of the Western Sea, (and) the land of the land of the Bīt-Yakīn, which is in the midst of the Western Sea, (and) the land of the land of the Bīt-Yakīn, which is in the midst of the Western Sea,
... the king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the king, my lord. I have no sons, no grandsons, no brothers, no nephews, no prefect, no mayor, no governor, no deputy, no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ...
If the rising of Jupiter is seen early: the king of Akkad will extend the life.
of Nabû-bel-šumati ...
I have sent my messenger to the king of Elam. If the king of Elam sends a message to Assyria, I shall immediately send it to the king, my lord.
Witness Ubrî, cohort commander.
... the army of the Elamites ...
As to the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Send ... !" — I have sent ... to the king, my lord.
10 ditto, small;
Witness Šep-Aššur, ...
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord.
If Venus becomes visible in the path of the Enlil stars: the king of Akkad will die, and his country will experience severe famine.
2 of the bodyguards;
... ,
I, Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, mighty king, king of the four quarters (of the world), king of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, (5) son of Esarhaddon, mighty king, king of the four quarters (of the world), king of Babylon, (and) king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, descendant of Sennacherib, mighty king, king of the four quarters (of the world), (and) king of the land of Sumer and Akkad —
Witness Dususu.
... the land of the Medes, the land of the Manneans, the land of the ... , the land of the Urarṭians, the land of the ... , the land of the Ullubu, the land of the Ullusunu, the land of the ... , the land of the Ullusunu, the land of the Ullusunu, the land of the Ullusunu, the land of the Ullusunu, the land of the Ullusunu, the land of the Ullusunu, the land of the Ull
I had a stele made, and had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, written on it. I had (this stele) placed before the god Aššur, my lord, and (then) I had my royal image engraved on it. I deposited (it) for future days.
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Send ... !" —
... and ...
Witness Uburutu.
(As for) Nabopolassar, the king of the land Elam, who had sent his weapons against the Assyrians, I captured him alive in the thick of (that) mighty battle. I took away from him his chariots, his wagons, his horses, his mules, his donkeys, his Bactrian camels, his oxen, (and) his sheep and goats, which were more numerous than locusts. Moreover, I carried off his people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, oxen
140 minas, 100 sheep, 100 jars of wine.
... the Urarṭian(s) ...
After I had prayed to the god Aššur, my lord, and the great gods, my lords, had granted me victory over my enemies, I marched to the land of the Medes, a dangerous enemy. I conquered from the land of the Medes as far as the land of the Manneans, a district in the area of the salt desert, a distance of three double hours from the land of the Medes. I took away from them their cities, their land, and their gods, and I brought (them) to my city Aššur.
... the land of Akkad
God Aššur, great lord, king of all the great gods; god Anu, king of the Igīgū and Anunnakū gods, lord of the lands; god Enlil, exalted one, father of the gods, creator of (5) all; god Ea, king of the apsû, lord of wisdom and understanding; god Sîn, wise one, king of the lunar disk, lofty luminary; god Adad, the exceptionally strong, lord of abundance; god Šamaš, judge of heaven and underworld, commander of all;
... of the king of Elam ...
Does your great divinity know it? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-belu-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! The city of Der and the fort are well.
He ...
total, ...
The sons of the king, my lord, are doing very well.
... will he make common cause with the king of Elam? Will he side with the king of Elam? Does your great divinity know it?
... of the day
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Witness Nabû-abu-uṣur, ...
Witness Silim-ili.
the town of Gidgidanu ...
... the ...
... -Adad, his servants;
... of the fort
... the land of the king ...
... of their ... s
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), leader of a widespread population, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, the one who carries out to perfection the rites of Ešarra and the sanctuaries of Assyria, the one who makes sattukku-offering(s) abundant, the one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, the one who renovates the cult centers of the great gods,
... is his ... The chariot is his ... The horse is his ...
(As for) Tarḫun-azi of the city Melid (and) Tarḫu-lara of the city Marqasa, who had uttered grievous blasphem(ies) against my gods, I ripped out their tongue(s and) flayed them in the city Arbela, my capital city. I hung their corpses on poles and placed (them) around the city. I reorganized that district (i 55) (and) imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates
The gods of Subartu.
When I heard that you had been treated in this way, I sent my messenger to you. Now then I have sent to you my messenger with the following message: "Come and grasp my feet! I will take you to the king, my lord."
If a planet ... in the sky: the days of the ruler will be long.
300, the chariot drivers;
20 minas, 10 togas, 10 tunics.
... is not a substitute for the king's work.
Witness ... -aplu-uṣur.
1 seah 1 'litre' of regular offering loaves;
And as to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... the son of Yakin ... "
I brought back all together 1,300 people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats, which were more numerous than locusts, from the city Sais, which is in the district of the city Pelusium, and I counted (them) as booty.
4 ... ;
... the palace herald of the land of ...
The king, my lord, knows that I am a poor man.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. The very  best of health to the king, my lord!
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, changed or altered the proceedings, or jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
a ditto of small onions;
... his sons ...
Moreover, they have not agreed to this, but are saying: "Why should we ... ?
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šarru-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord!
We kept watch for the moon; on the 29th day, there were clouds, we did not see the moon. On the next day, it was 29th day, we did not see the moon. On the next day, it was 30th day, we did not see the moon.
... cavalryman ...
500 — Il-hari
I myself prayed to the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Nusku, (and) Nergal, the gods who support me, for victory over (my) strong enemy and they immediately heeded my prayers (and) came to my aid.
... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to ... to
If on the 14th day the moon and sun are seen together: reliable speech; the land will become happy; the gods will remember Akkad favorably; there will be joy among the people; the king will become happy.
12,000 sheep and ewes, 1,000 oxen, 1,000 homers of wine, 1,000 homers of dates, 1,000 homers of wine, 1,000 homers of dates, 1,000 homers of wine, 1,000 homers of dates, 1,000 homers of wine, 1,000 homers of dates, 1,000 homers of wine, 1,000 hom
... of Kar-Šamaš
they have weighed and ...
they will ...
... of the land of the people ...
Witness Aplu-uṣur, court clerque.
From the city of ... , I have come to the city of ... , saying: "I have been sent to the city of ... "
Whoever breaks the contract shall pay 10 minas of silver and 10 minas of gold to Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owner.
If there is an eclipse in Adar (XII) on the 14th day in the evening watch, and the king of Elam is on the attack against the king of Assyria, and the king of Elam is victorious over the king of Assyria, and the king of Elam is alive, and the king of Assyria is defeated:
1 goose, 1 duck, 10 turtledoves.
To the king, my lord: your servant Akkullanu. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
From Nabû-šuma-iškun.
Palace of Sargon (II), king of Assyria.
I have sent ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
I have given out the corn rations of the Arabs, and they are cultivating their fields.
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria; the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, built Ešarra, renovated Ekur, completed the rites, (and) who returned the plundered gods of the lands to their
The son of the woman of the house of the Hittites, a servant of the governor of Arrapha, has been sold for money. The woman of the house of the Hittites, a servant of the governor of Arrapha, has been sold for money.
Witness Bel-...
I have sent ...
The father of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, who is now dead, was a servant of Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, and was assiduous towards the shrines of Assur, Nippur, Babylon, and Borsippa, the temples of Assur, Nippur, Nusku, and Uruk, the dais of destiny, the dais of the goddess Ištar, the dais of the goddess Ištar of Uruk, the dais of the goddess Ištar of N
The god Aššur, the great lord, ... the great gods, his lords, ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who ... the one who
As for Ša-Nabû-šû, who had uttered grievous blasphem(ies) against my gods, I ripped out his tongue (and) flayed him. I hung his corpse on a pole and placed (him) before the god Marduk, my lord. I wrote on a writing-board the deeds that I had done to him and I left (it) for future days. I made a royal image of myself and wrote on it the deeds that I had done to Ša-Nabû-šû, my enemy.
From Nabû'a of Assur.
... Nergal-apil-kumu'a
Witness ... -šarru-ibni.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did he not come?" I have now written to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
Nabû-eriba, ... ;
Nabû-ahu-uṣur, his wife,
total, 10 ...
If there is a 'weapon'-mark on the 'crucible' of the lung which faces upward and it is located on the 'crucible' of the lung, and if it is located on the right side of the 'crucible' of the lung: the king of Akkad will exercise complete dominion over his land.
If there is a 'weapon'-mark on the right side of the 'finger': the people of the land will rage.
... of the 'cavity'
Witness Zarî, scribe.
Witness Ahu-uṣur, eunuch of the chief eunuch.
a bowl of ...
The king should ask the scribe of the palace whether or not the words are true.
Sukki-Aya,
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
The eunuch NN, the ... of the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of N
Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria: I had two lions, which were brought from the mountains, placed before ... , the god of the steppe, and I had (them) trampled down with my feet. I had the two lions of copper, which were cast by the god Ninagal, placed before the goddess Ištar, the lady of the steppe, and I had (them) trampled down with my feet.
1 seah of wine for the gods.
The king, my lord, can be glad.
In the top of the gall bladder there is a hole. There is a hole in the 'yoke' of the liver.
I have now written to the son of Yakin. If he comes, I shall send him to the king, my lord. If not, I shall write to the king, my lord, whatever news there is.
... my messenger
As to the work on the palace of ... , the king, my lord, should know (about it).
To the king of the lands, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord!
Gula of the steppe.
Now, if it is acceptable to the king, my lord, let them bring me the  (barley) rations of the king, my lord, and I will cultivate and harvest the  barley.
I placed at their service the god Marduk, the great lord, and the goddess Zarpanītu, the queen, and I made (them) enter into Esagil, the palace of the gods. I made (them) sit on (their) eternal dais(es) and (re)confirmed (their) sattukku offerings.
adjoining the house of Marduk-ereš, adjoining the house of the chariot driver,
The 7th day: good news.
(As for) Uaiteʾ (Iautaʾ), son of Hazael, son of Bir-Dāda, a servant who belonged to the king, his father,
I have heard that ... to the king, my lord.
I had a canopy, which rivals the heavens, made from musukkannu-wood, a durable wood. I clad its perimeter with thirty-four talents (and) twenty minas of reddish gold and (thereby) reinforced its bonds.
10 ditto, roasted;
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed. He shall return the money tenfold to its owner.
From Ašaredu.
I have heard that the servants of the king, my lord, who are in Elam, have been killed. The king, my lord, should know (this). I have also heard that the son of the king, my lord, is well. May the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
... the king, my lord, knows that I am a poor man, that I have no oxen and no sheep. I have no sons, no daughters, no brothers, no nephews, no prefect, no mayor, no governor, no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ... , no ...
14 tablets, ... ;
20 cavalrymen of the Elamites;
Ikūnum, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Erišum (I), vice-regent of the god Aššur:
The day you see this letter,
... -... -uṣur, son of NN,
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, son of Sennacherib, king of the world (and) king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of the world (and) king of Assyria, favorite of the great gods, perfect hero, strong king, king of the four quarters (of the world), leader of a widespread population, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, the one who carries
(If) a planet comes near the front of the moon and stands there: the king of Akkad will exercise complete dominion.
Witness Nabû-ahhe-šallim, baker.
The shepherds have been killed, and the orchards have been burned.
Now then I am sending to the king, my lord, my messenger. Let the king, my lord, ask him what the news is.
The god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises. He made all of the black-headed (people) from the Upper Sea of the Setting Sun to the Lower Sea of the Rising Sun bow down at my feet. (ii 10) Thus did recalcitrant rulers come to fear of doing battle with me. While they were abandoning their settlements, (ii 15) they flew away alone like bats (living) in cre
the forts ...
... the Itu'eans
Witness Šulî.
2 (of) Iqqur īpuš,
Month Iyyar (II), 26th day, eponym year of Sagab (651).
... , the ... day, eponymy of Banbâ, the deputy minister (sukkallu šanû) (676 BC).
... of the son of Yakin ...
the governor of ...
1 necklace of serpentine, 1 ... ,
1 ... of Nabû-belu-uṣur, son of Bel-Harran-šarru-uṣur.
Witness Aplu-uṣur, ditto.
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), leader of a widespread population, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, the one who carries out to perfection the rites of Ešarra and Ezida, the one who builds the shrines of the steppe and the mountains, the one who makes sattukku-offering(s) abundant, the one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, the one who provides
... I have not seen. If it is acceptable to the king, my lord, let them bring it in.
Property of Sennacherib, king of Assyria, son of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, which was placed in the temple of the god Aššur.
1 (for) 1 (of) 4 (spans' height), 1 (for) 2 (of) 3 (spans' height), 1 (for) 1 (of) 4 (spans' height), 1 (for) 1 (of) 3 (spans' height), 1 (for) 1 (of) 2 (spans' height), 1 (for) 1 (of) 1 (spans' height), 1 (for) 1 (of) 1 (spans' height), 1
Witness Mušezib-Aššur, ...
... the priest of the bēt ēqi
... this
Witness Se'-ila'i, ditto.
The palace of Sargon (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, son of Tiglath-pileser (III), king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dān (III), (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria.
News of the son of Yakin: he is in Elam.
... sent ...
... the king, my lord, knows that I am a poor man, that I have no oxen, that I have no sheep, that I have no wine, that I have no oil, that I have no honey, that I have no ghee, that I have no cedar resin, that I have no juniper resin, that I have no ... resin, that I have no ... resin, that I have no ... resin,
... Ša-la-Bel-mannu, the son of the deputy
At that time, in the reign of a previous king, bad omens(s) occurred in the land. The people living there were answering each other yes (for) no (and) were telling lies. They led their gods away, neglected their goddesses, abandoned their rites, (and) embraced quite different (rites). They put their hands on the possessions of Esagil, the palace of the gods, an inaccessible place, and sold the gold, silver, precious stones, (and) precious stones of the land at market value to the land Elam. They brought the god
... I have sent to my lord.
... the son of the commander-in-chief ...
The singer intones, “The Hero of the Steppe.” The king places a crown on the head of the ram, offers salt on the table, and places a libation bowl before the king. The singer intones, “The Hero of the Steppe.” The king places a libation bowl before the king, and offers salt on the table.
... to the Babylonians, saying: "I have given you to the king of Assyria. Do not ... to the king of Assyria, but to the king of Elam. I have sent you to the king of Elam."
... Witness ...
... their men
You shall not give Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, a deadly drug to eat or to drink, nor anoint him with it, nor practice witchcraft against him, nor make gods and goddesses angry with him, nor make the great crown prince designate hateful to you, nor make him hateful to you, nor make him your superior, nor make him your superior, nor make him your superior, nor make him your superior, nor make him your superior, nor make him your superior, nor make him
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me:
... Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, king of Assyria,
100 hectares of field, 1 house, 1 threshing-floor, 1 garden, 1 well, 1 ...
... to ...
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments...
Witness Apladadad-ila'i.
Dannaya, farmer, and his people; NN, farmer, and his people; NN, farmer, and his people;
Month of Iyyar (II), 12th day.
Yasubaya ...
... of the land of Akkad ...
The palace of Aššur-nārārī, king of the universe.
... "I will not give the people of the land of Akkad to the king of Elam. I will give them to the king of Assyria. I will not give them to the king of the land of the Medes, or to the king of the land of the Manneans, or to the king of the land of the ...
in the town of Arbela ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šarru-emuranni. Good health to the king, my lord!
From Nergal-eṭir.
... to the king, my lord.
4 ... s of Kushite horses;
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Nabû-naṣir, son of Nabû-le'i, his servant —
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether these men or their sons or their brothers or any relative of theirs, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Nabû-šarru-uṣur and his sons,
Month of Nisan (I), 28th day, eponym year of Aššur-belu-uṣur.
3 gowns, the front red, of the country;
Witness Nabû-isse'a.
20 turtledoves;
... the 'outside.'
Bel-epuš, ... , has contracted and bought them from these men for ...
... of the city ...
... , ... th day, eponym year of NN, commander-in-chief.
The day that he pays the silver, he shall redeem his land.
Concerning the work on the river of Dur-Šarruken, about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Do the work!" — I have done the work. I have cut down the trees, dug out the stumps, and piled up the earth. I have cut down the reeds and the rushes, and have piled up the rest of the work. I have cut down the poplars and the willows.
They have been staying in the city of Dur-Šarruken, and I have been staying in the city of Calah. The king, my lord, should know (this).
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the subject of this query, Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, ...
Bel-aplu-iddina, son of Nabû-ahhe-šallim, servant of Nabû-ahhe-šallim.
The Lady of Babylon
... to the king
If Nabû-ahhe-iddin ...
The 5th day ...
NN, royal bodyguard;
... when I saw
of Na'id-...
The vineyard is acquired and purchased. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Witness Nabû-eriba, eunuch of the governor.
Ikūnum, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Erišum (I), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Ilu-šumma, vice-regent of Aššur:
Witness Qurdi-Issar, horse trainer of the ...
Total, of Ašaredu son of Nabû-šarru-uṣur.
The 'well-being' is present.
... our ...
... or the ...
If on the 1st day of the month of your watch the sun rises and is red, and its rising is like the rising of the sun of the month of Tammuz (IV): the king of the Westland will fall in battle; the king of Elam will die; the king of Assyria will die; the king of Gutiya will die; the king of ... will die; the king of ... will die; the king of ... will die; the king of ... will die; the king of ... will die; the king of ... will die; the king of ... will die; the
Month of Shebat (XI), 6th day, eponym year of Bel-Harran-šadû'a.
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur, Bel and Nabû bless the king, my lord.
the temple of ...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the ... of the land of Akkad, ... of the land of Akkad, ... of the land of Akkad, ... of the land of Akkad, ... of the land of Akkad, ... of the land of Akkad, ... of the land of Akkad, ... of the land of Akkad, ... of the land of Akkad, ... of the land of Akkad, ... of the land of Akkad, ... of the land of Akkad, ... of the land of Akk
... Aššur-šarru-uṣur ...
Ibâ son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN,
NN, his son, adolescent;
Marduk-šumu-uṣur, Naṣiru, Tabnî, ...
(As for) Uaiteʾ (Iautaʾ), son of Hazael, son of the brother of Uaiteʾ, son of Bir-Dāda, (and) Abī-Yateʾ, son of Aya-ammu, (... )
the man who is his servant ...
Abi-ila'i,
... to Nabû-ilu
The money is paid completely. That vineyard is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
I, Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, son of Sennacherib, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria —
... If he does not pay, the silver shall increase by a fourth.
I ...
Concerning the news of the son of the king of Elam, the messenger of the king, my lord, who went to Elam, has seen him. He has told the king, my lord: "He is in Bit-Imbî."
As to the work on the ziggurat of the king, my lord, about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Do the work!" —
If the moon becomes visible on the 30th day: the king of the Westland will fall in battle; there will be a fall of Elam.
... from Urdu-...
On the day that they pay the silver, they shall redeem the land.
When the god Marduk, the great lord, looked upon my good deeds(s) with pleasure and when he granted to me as a gift (the ability) to make (cities) great, to raise (them) up, to glorify (them), and to make (them) endure forever, he commanded me to build Esagil and Babylon, to renovate (its) gods and goddesses, and to complete (its) shrines.
... not yet ...
... of wine
2 talents, Ṣuṣṣu;
4 minas of silver, capital, by the mina of Carchemish, belonging to Nergal-ila'i, at the disposal of Nabû-ila'i, son of Nabû-ila'i.
If a fog rolls in Shebat (XI): eclipse of the land of the Kassites.
seal of Nabû-eriba, ... ,
Concerning the ritual against the rābiṣu (demon) about which you wrote, it is good that you wrote and informed me.
a writing-board ...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether the governor, his deputy, or his son, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Remanni-Adad,
Marduk-apla-iddina ...
Witness Iddin-Ea.
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Give the son of Nabû-nammir a house in Nineveh" — I have given him a house in Nippur. I have given him a house in Nippur, a house in Nineveh, a house in Uruk, a house in Der, and a house in Dilbat. I have not given him a house in Sippar.
The day that you see this letter, ... the gods of the king, my lord, will listen to the prayers of the king, my lord. The king, my lord, can be glad.
I have sent my messenger to you.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... the palace ...
On my second campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me and I marched to the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians, a dangerous enemy who since time immemorial had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors. In the mountains, difficult terrain, I rode on horseback and had my personal chariot carried on (men’s) necks. In very rugged terrain I roamed about on foot like a wild bull.
The king should ask ... :
I put to the sword the population of the city Ḫirimmu, a dangerous enemy, and I did not spare a single one. I hung their corpses on poles and placed (them) around the city. I reorganized that district (i 55) (and) imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the gods of Assyria, my lords.
of Assyria ...
The messenger of the son of Yakin who is in the presence of the king, my lord, should be sent to me.
Witness Barruqu, ditto.
and ...
... he
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
... they are
... the royal bodyguard
an estate of 30 hectares of land
The 17th day: at court, favorable.
8 females, 5 maids;
NN, ... ;
... of the king of Elam to the god Aššur
1 woman-...
8 of the ... -type;
Witness Sukki-Aya.
... the king, my lord ...
Witness Aššur-šumu-uṣur.
... I marched to the land of the Medes, a dangerous enemy, and I fought with them. In the mountains, difficult terrain, I rode on horseback and had my personal chariot carried on (men’s) necks. In very rugged terrain I roamed about on foot like a wild bull. I fought with them and defeated them. In the mountains I cut off the heads of their soldiers. I filled the plain with the corpses of their soldiers like grass.
to ...
If the moon at its appearance wears a crown: the harvest of the land will prosper; the king will reach the highest rank.
... of NN
If a bird carries ...
the town of the goddess Ištar ...
... all ...
An estate of 1 hectare of land, adjoining the road leading to the village of Zabinu and the side road of the village of Zabinu —
Now then I am sending to you Nabû-uṣalla, the bodyguard ...
Moreover, I placed at their service the former ramku-priests, pašīšu-priests, (and) ecstatics, those initiated in secret rites. I set before them purification priests, āšipu-priests, lamentation priests, (and) singers, who have mastered (their) entire craft. I set before them purification priests, āšipu-priests, lamentation priests, (and) singers, who have mastered (their) entire craft.
Why does the king, my lord, ... ?
From Balasî.
Tablet of Bel-duri to the king of Elam. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
The palace of Aššur-nārārī, king of the universe, son of Išme-Dagan (II), king of Assyria, son of Erišum (II), (who was) also king of Assyria: booty of the land of the Kassites.
... of salt
... the land of the Medes, the land of the Manneans, the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the
... the great gods of heaven and earth, king of the four quarters (of the world),
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), leader of a widespread population, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, I: With baked bricks from a (ritually) pure kiln, I raised the Step Gate of the Palace in Baltil (Aššur) as high as a mountain.
of the woman Gagu ...
The king of Babylon and the king of Elam have sent their messengers to Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II) concerning the tribute and payment of the god Marduk.
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhe.
... the son of the king ...
Adad-nārārī, king of the universe, son of Šamšī-Adad V, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (III), (who was) also king of the universe:
Now, if you say: "I want to go to the aid of the Elamites," then go and see them, and if they are willing to fight with you, fight with them. If not, and if they are not willing to fight with you, then do not fight with them, but come and tell me, and I will write to Assurbanipal, my lord, whatever news there is.
... Witness NN.
Witness Ša-la-mašê, priest.
The palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of the universe, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of the universe: booty of the city Ḫindānu.
... and when ...
... the royal bodyguard whom the king, my lord, ...
... of the 'finger.'
to the 5th of ...
I have sent my messenger to the king, my lord; let the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
Ninurta-nadin-shumi,
And concerning the work on the ziggurat of the god Adad of the Inner City, of which I spoke to the king, my lord, saying: "I have started work on it" — I have indeed started work on it. I have cut down the date-palms which were in the way of the work, and I have cut down the reeds which were in the way of the work. I have cut down the poplars which were in the way of the work. I have cut down the willows which were in the way of the work. I have cut down the musukkann
An estate of x hectares of land adjoining the field of Nanî,
In the time of Aššur-dān (II), king of Assyria, ...
If the moon at its appearance ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... of their hearts
Witness Zar-Issar.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, should ... the men, horses and army which are in ... ,
To the king, my lord: your servant Ninurta-belu-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord!
... son of Aširâ, son of Nabû-nammir, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN,
Witness Silim-Aššur, grand vizier.
to you ...
... the palace of the governor of ...
Month Iyyar (II), 5th day, eponym year of NN.
... of the temple of Nabû
Witness Nabû-apil-kumu'a, cohort commander.
1, Abda', the mayor;
16 in all, 10 ... ;
Witness Inurta-ahu-uṣur, scribe.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nadin-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
The palace of Adad-nārārī, king of the universe, son of Arik-dīn-ili, king of Assyria, son of Enlil-nārārī (who was) also king of Assyria: booty of the city Ḫindānu.
2 of black horses,
The land of the governor of Raṣappa is well; the forts are well. The king, my lord, can be glad.
Ikūnum, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Erišum (I), vice-regent of the god Aššur:
... of the land of the king, my lord, ...
Seal of Se'-natan, owner of the woman being sold.
The palace of Aššur-nārārī, king of the universe, son of Išme-Dagan (II), king of the universe, son of Išme-Dagan (II) (who was) also king of the universe: I had a stele made and had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, written on it.
I brought out Padî, their king, from the city Jerusalem and placed (him) on the lordly throne over them, then I imposed upon him payment (in recognition) of my overlordship.
Month Iyyar (II), 20th day, eponym year of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, governor of Sam'al.
... Aya-...
... to the city of ...
5 minas, NN, for the work of the goddess ...
From Adad-šumu-uṣur.
... the governor ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-le'i. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
(If) he dies or flees, the responsibility is upon his owner.
... the land of Akkad to Bit-Amukani ...
Bel-... is the guarantor of Nabû-šumu-uṣur.
2 ditto ... ;
As to what you wrote: "I have sent ... to the son of NN, saying: 'Let the son of NN with his army come and stay with me, so that we can keep watch over Assyria'" — why did you not write to the son of NN, your lord, and say: "Let the son of NN with his army come and stay with me, so that we can keep watch over Assyria with the king, my lord"? Now, why did you not write to the son of NN, your lord? Now, why did you not say to the son of N
... of Kar-Nergal
40 hectares, ditto, ditto, of Ahi-qamu'a;
... the palace women
On the 11th day of the month Ayyāru (II),
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
600, 700, 800 — the city of Isana;
81 (men), 81 (donkeys): the ... eunuchs ...
If the moon and sun are in balance: reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king will make his throne last long.
... s of the forts
200 sheep, 200 jars of wine, 200 jars of oil, 200 jars of honey, 200 jars of beer, 200 jars of wine, 200 jars of oil, 200 jars of wine, 200 jars of oil, 200 jars of honey, 200 jars of beer, 200 jars of wine, 200 jars of oil, 200 jars of wine, 200 j
The king of Babylon, the king of the land of the Guti, the king of the land of the Uqumanu, the king of the land of the Bīt-Amukāni, the king of the land of the Bīt-Šilāni, the king of the land of the Bīt-Yakīn, the king of the land of the Bīt-Dakkūri, the king of the land of the Bīt-Aḫḫē-iddina, the king of the land of the Bīt-Zualzaš
Month Tammuz (IV), 25th day, eponym year of Šulmu-šarri.
I am sending him to the king, my lord.
... huzirayu, son of Haya-...
... the land of the Medes, the land of the Manneans, the land of the Cimmerians, the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land
in the time of my grandfather ... the king, my lord, ...
Now then I am sending to you my messenger, who will bring the letter of the king, my lord, to you. Do not neglect to keep the watch over the Urarṭians, but keep it over the Itu'eans as well. As for you, keep your guard over the land of the king, my lord, and over the Itu'eans, and do not neglect to keep your guard over the land of the king, my lord.
The town of Zabdâ.
The one who crushed the Barnaki, a dangerous enemy, who live in the city Tīl-Ašurri, which is called Pitānu in the language of the people of the land Miḫrānu; the one who scattered the Mannean people, undisciplined Gutians — (vii 10) (as for) the land Patušarri, a district in the area of the salt desert, which is in the midst of the land of the distant Medes, borders Mount Bikni, (and) upon the soil of whose land none of the kings
Nabû-le'i, his wife, 1 son of his;
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Eltekeh (and) Tamnâ. I approached the city Ekron and I killed the governors (and) nobles who had committed crime(s) and hung their corpses on towers around the city; I counted the citizens who had committed (iii 10) the criminal acts as booty; (and) I commanded that the rest of them, (those) who were not guilty of crimes or wrongdoing, (to) whom no penalty was due, be allowed to go free.
Nabû-zeru-iddina, Nergal-eṭir, NN,
Witness Šulmu-ahhe, royal bodyguard.
3 shekels of silver, capital, belonging to Bahianu, at the disposal of Zabinu.
Total 11 ...
Witness Šarru-emuranni.
The king, my lord, knows that I am a dog of the house of my lord.
To the king, my lord: your servant Balasî. Good health to the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: The king's forts and troops are well. The mood of the people is good. The king, my lord, can be glad.
... the land ...
... of Nabû-eṭir
I ...
with ...
... the land of ... to Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assyria ... Assy
5 mares:
The ... of the Urarṭian ... has been brought to me. I have given it to the ... of the Urarṭian ... , saying: "... to the Urarṭian ... !"
... before Bel
The chariot-driver of the queen mother
The king, my lord, knows that I am a dog of the house of my lord.
Witness ... -ahhe.
the town of Bit-Amukani ...
May Šamaš, the light of the gods, and Marduk, the king of the gods, look with joy upon my good deeds and order the prolongation of my days, the protection of my offspring, the increase of my progeny, and the expansion of my family.
Witness Nabû-šumu-... , scribe, keeper of the tablet.
... they have not yet brought
The 'path' ...
... Iqišâ, NN,
... to the king, my lord ...
... Esarhaddon, king of Assyria,
I took the city Elenzaš as a royal city and a fortress for that district, then I changed its former name and called it Kār-Sennacherib. I settled therein the people of the lands that I had conquered. I placed (it) under the authority of a eunuch of mine, the governor of the city Ḫarḫar, and (thus) enlarged my land. I had a stele made, had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over them written on it, and I erected (it) in (that) city.
eponym year of NN.
Total — the goddess Ištar of the temple.
If the moon is surrounded by a river: the king of the land will die, and Adad will diminish the floods.
Damascus
seal of Sasî,
On the day that the king of Elam ...
... I sent ... to the king, my lord. The ... of the land of ... and the land of the land of ... are very much afraid of the king, my lord. They have not dared to send ... to the king, my lord.
Muṣaṣir-...
From Urad-Gula.
Month of Šabāṭu (XI), 10th day, eponym year of Banbâ, the deputy minister.
adjoining ... ,
in the presence of the king ...
Witness Ubru-Nabû, cook.
May a later prince, when that temple becomes dilapidated and he renovates (it), anoint my monumental inscriptions with oil, make a sacrifice, and return (them) to their places. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
To the king, my lord: your servant Šarru-emuranni. Good health to the king, my lord!
The goddess Ištar who resides in the city Arbela, who is clothed in fire (and) clothed in awe-inspiring radiance, who is clothed in awe-inspiring radiance, who is clothed in awe-inspiring radiance, who is clothed in awe-inspiring radiance, who is clothed in awe-inspiring radiance, who is clothed in awe-inspiring radiance, who is clothed in awe-inspiring radiance
Witness Sukki-Aya.
The king, my lord, knows that ... the Itu'eans ... and the Itu'eans ...
... Esaggil and Babylon ...
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Šamaš-ila'i.
Witness NN, his servant.
Now ...
If the moon at its appearance wears a crown: the harvest of the land will prosper; the king will reach the highest rank.
15 Kushite horses have come in.
(Property) of Marduk-zākir-šumi, king of the world, king of Babylon.
Palace of Sennacherib, king of Assyria. Whoever erases my inscribed name (or) places (it) in the service of a god (or another) person, may the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Adad, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Nergal, Ištar of Nineveh, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Nusku, (and) Nergal,
... will hear
I have been staying in the city of ... , and the horses which were brought to me from the city of ... have been staying in the city of ... with me.
an estate of 1 hectare adjoining Marduk-ereš, adjoining the temple,
28 shekels of silver, of the palace scribe, of the queen mother.
total 6: the 'residence' of ...
... of the town of Harihumba
At that time, Nabopolassar, king of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, the one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, the one who is assiduous towards the rites of the great gods, the one who is assiduous towards the rites of the god Nabû, the one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, the one who provides for the sanctuaries of the gods of the land of Sumer and Akkad, the one who provides for the rites of the great gods, the one who provides for the r
To the god Nabû, ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-pašir. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
... the son of Yakin
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-šumu-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord!
4 minas of silver, 2 togas, 2 tunics: the Grand Vizier;
with me ...
... here ...
10 ... s of theirs;
1 seah of ...
Month Elul (VI), 20th day, eponym year of Mannu-ki-Adad.
my lord knows that ...
... who ... and who ... , who ... and who ... , who ... and who ... , who ... and who ... , who ... and who ... , who ... and who ... , who ... and who ... , who ... and who ... , who ... and who ... , who ... and who ... , who ... and who ... , who ... and who ... , who ... and who ... , who ... and who ... , who ... and who ... , who ... and who ... , who ... and who ... , who ... and who ... , who ... and who ... , who ... and who ... , who ... and who ... , who
... of the town of ...
Gula ...
If the earth quakes at night: ...
Concerning the Arabs about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Arrive before me!" — I have arrived before the king, my lord. I have been staying in the presence of the king, my lord, and have been eating bread under the protection of the king, my lord.
... we will do
... 20 hectares ...
... Assyria ...
May the goddess Ištar, lady of battle, break his bow in the thick of battle, may she bind his arms, and may she have him crouch as a captive under his enemy.
On my third campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me and I marched to the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians, a dangerous enemy who since Tukriš (I) had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors. In the mountains, difficult terrain, I rode on horseback and had my personal chariot carried on (men’s) necks. In very rugged terrain I roamed about on foot like a wild bull.
Witness Nabû-šallim, mayor.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
... to ...
Witness Aššur-...
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sargon (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tiglath-pileser (II), (who was) also great king, strong king, king of the world, (and) king of Assyria.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract,
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial payment from the distant Medes, of whose land none of the kings, my ancestors, had heard mention. (Thus) I made them bow down to the yoke of my lordship.
... the 'well-being' ...
... I had a stele made, and I wrote on it all the mighty victories that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the great gods, my lords, and (then) I erected (it) in the city ...
Now, if the king, my lord, commands: "Let them bring the son of Yakin to me, and let me question him." I have written to the king, my lord, what I have seen and heard.
4 litres of honey ...
Witness Abi-Aššur, horse trainer.
... the land
The king, my lord, should ask the scribe of the palace supervisor whether the men are  servants of the palace supervisor, or whether they are servants of the king, my lord.
From Rašil, son of Nurzanu.
Total, in the town of Ubana, near the city of Harran.
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... to Bel-Harran-...
130 ... ;
“You, the divine lady of ladies, the goddess of war, the lady of battle, the advisor of the gods — her ancestors — the one who speaks good thing(s) about me before (the god) Aššur — the father who had engendered you — (so that) at the glance of his pure eyes he desired me to be king — with regard to Teumman, the king of the land Elam (v 15) who placed a burden on (the god) Aššur — the king of the gods, the father who had engendered you — he
When the Urarṭian heard that the Urarṭian had been defeated, he wrote to the king, his lord: "The king of Urarṭu has been defeated." The king, his lord, should not believe him.
Month of Shebat (XI), 5th day, eponym year of Dananu of Marqasa.
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur.
when the eclipse ...
A tablet of Bel-ibni to the palace scribe. Good health to my lord!
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Seal of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, son of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, owner of the vineyard being sold.
Concerning the news of the king of Elam, the messenger of the king of Assyria who went to Uruk and told it to the king, my lord, said: "The king of Elam has been killed."
... of the enemy
Tribute from the land of the Medes.
do not go ...
Shalmaneser, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (I), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of Aššur:
To the king, my lord: your servant Balasî. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May the great gods bestow long days, well-being and joy upon the king, my lord!
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, changed or altered the proceedings, or jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
daughter of ... , maid of ...
... his ... s, his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... ,
Seal of Aplaya, seal of Nabû-nammir, owner of the vineyard being sold.
the work of the king ...
... to their sons ...
... the king ...
Two governors ... in the presence of the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should ask them whether the men are friends or enemies.
... they will come ...
Disregard that ...
As to the ... of the Urarṭians about which you wrote, I have sent ... to the Urarṭian.
Your servant Nabû-bel-šumate: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: I have sent my messenger to greet the king, the horses and the soldiers.
May Nergal, the strongest among the gods, destroy his people through plague and pestilence.
... of the land of ...
A tablet of Aššur-zeru-ibni to the king, his brother. Good health to the king, my brother!
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord!
x hectares of land in the town of Uqimutaya, adjoining the road leading to the town of Uqimutaya and the road leading to the town of Uqimutaya;
On the 10th of Tammuz (IV), when the king, my lord, was staying overnight in Dur-Šarruken, the king, my lord, gave me the following order: "Take care of the bull colossus of Aššur-naṣir."
... the king, my lord
Witness Abi-suri, scribe.
... the men of Yakin
of ...
... the river Ulai ...
The man whose name is written in this tablet and placed before your great divinity ...
Month ... , xth day, eponym year of
(As for) Aya-rāmu, who had brought about the defeat of the land of the Arabs (and) had plundered the land of the Arabs, I captured him alive (and) brought him to Assyria. I placed him in a neck stock, bound him with a bear (and) a dog, and (iii 10) set him up as a guard in the citadel gate of Nineveh, opposite the gate of the goddess Ištar, my lady. I had a stele made, had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over him written
I received tribute from the land of the Medes, from the land Ellipi, from the land Gutium, from the land Bīt-Barrû, from the land Bīt-Zualzaš, from the land Bīt-Matti, from the land Bīt-Saʾalli, from the land Bīt-Dakkūri, from the land Bīt-Zualzaš, from the land Bīt-Saʾalli, from the land Bīt-Saʾalli, from the land Bīt-Sa
in the temple of ...
... me ...
they will say.
6,000 stalks of vine; 1 house; 1 threshing-floor; 1 garden; 1 vegetable garden; 1 house; 1 threshing-floor; 1 garden; 1 house; 1 threshing-floor; 1 garden; 1 house; 1 threshing-floor; 1 garden; 1 house; 1 threshing-floor; 1 garden; 1 house; 1 threshing-floor; 1 garden; 1 house; 1 threshing-floor; 1 garden
Marduk, Zarpanitu, Nabû, Tašmetu, Nergal, Laṣ, Gula, Ištar of Nineveh, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta of the Wall, Gula of the Wall, Nusku, Mandanu, Nergal of the Wall, Nusku of the Wall, Nusku of the Step Gate, Nusku of the Step Gate, Nusku of the Step Gate, Nusku of the Step Gate, Nusku of the Step Gate, Nusku of the Step Gate, N
20 cavalrymen of the son of Aššur-ibni, the son of Aššur-ibni, the son of Aššur-ibni, the son of Aššur-ibni, the son of Aššur-ibni, the son of Aššur-ibni, the son of Aššur-ibni, the son of Aššur-ibni, the son of Aššur-ibni, the son of Aššur-ibni, the son of Aššur-ibni,
Your servant Ina-tešî-eṭir: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
As to what the king ...
... they rejoice ...
If Mars is black: the king of Elam ...
In the future may a later prince, when that temple becomes dilapidated and he renovates (it), anoint my monumental inscriptions with oil, make a sacrifice, and return (them) to their places. (Then) the god Šamaš will listen to his prayers.
Month Tammuz (IV), ... th day, eponym year of Bel-šarru-uṣur, governor of ...
... of their ... s
to ...
10 turtledoves ...
... of Nabû-iqiša
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether these men or their sons or their brothers or any relative of theirs, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Bel-ahhe-šallim,
Witness Nabû-reši-išši, ...
Now then I am sending Aššur-ahu-iddina to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, question him, and let him tell the king, my lord, how the work is progressing.
... the land of Akkad
Witness NN, scribe.
Concerning the substitute king about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
To the king, my lord: your servant Balasî. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I have sent ... to NN.
Total 32 — the town of Arbunê.
... s, NN ditto, NN ditto,
I shall send ...
To the governor, my lord: your servant Nabû-nadin-šumi. Good health to the governor, my lord!
... to me ...
... Now then, if it is acceptable to the king, my lord, let them bring him into the palace.
Witness NN, scribe.
In the future, may one of the kings, my descendants, whom the god Marduk and the goddess Zarpanītu choose and nominate for ruling over the land and people, renovate its dilapidated section(s) when that temple becomes dilapidated and old.
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
May Aššur, the great lord, make firm the foundations of your royal throne until far-off days!
Two sons of NN, a total of 3 persons, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, NN, N
... to the king, my lord ...
In the future may a later prince, when that wall becomes dilapidated and he renovates (it), anoint my monumental inscriptions with oil, make a sacrifice, and return (them) to their places. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
I raged up like a lion, then put on armor (and) placed a helmet suitable for combat on my head. (v 10) In my anger, I rode quickly in my exalted battle chariot, which lays enemies low. I took in my hand the mighty bow that the god Aššur had granted to me (and) I grasped in my hand an arrow that cuts off life.
... s in the house of ...
... the king, my lord
... his heart
If a planet becomes visible in the path of the sun: the king of Akkad will die.
... the king, my lord ...
to NN ...
If the moon becomes visible on the 30th day: the king of the Westland will fall in battle.
Witness NN, son of Abi-rahî.
... the land of the Medes, the land of the Manneans, ... the land of the ... , the land of the Urarṭians, ... the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ... , the land of the ...
1, (of the) daughter of the son of NN,
... of Nergal-apil-kumu'a
Witness Abi-ul-idi, ditto.
I received tribute from the city Arzâ, which is in the district of the Brook of Egypt: gold, silver, gold pails, ivory, spears, and garments with multi-colored trim.
Ashur-ila'i.
cure of ...
1 seah of kernels;
... to the town of Šabbu in the district of ...
It will increase by a fourth.
Witness Aššur-eriba, ...
Nabû-ila'i, ... of the queen mother;
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), leader of a widespread population, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, I: With baked bricks from a (ritually) pure kiln, I raised the Step Gate of the Palace in Baltil (Aššur) as high as a mountain.
... I have not yet received the rest of the horses.
The ... s of the king, my lord, ... to the king, my lord.
For the god Marduk, the great lord, his lord: Esarhaddon, king of Assyria (and) king of Babylon, renovated Eanna (“House of Heaven”), the temple of highest rank, for the sake of his life, and made (it) shine like daylight.
Your servant Bel-iqiša: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
Month Elul (VI), 3rd day, eponym year of Sin-šarru-uṣur.
Witness ... -zeru-ibni, palace manager.
5 cans of beer;
The great gods in their assembly determined a favorable destiny as my lot and gave me a weapon to fell enemies. (v 10) With the support of the god Aššur, my lord, I marched to the land of the Medes, a dangerous enemy, and I fought with them. In the course of my campaign, I conquered and plundered the cities of the Medes which are on the border of the land of the Manneans. (v 15) I took away from them their horses, their mules, their Bactrian camels, their oxen,
I have not seen ... in the land of the Palace Herald.
At that time, Nineveh, the exalted cult center, the city loved by the goddess Ištar in which all of the rituals for gods and goddesses are present; (20) (and) which Sennacherib, king of Assyria, a ruler who came before me, had built — that wall had become old, collapsed, and its foundation had become weak. I removed its debris, renovated it from top to bottom, and deposited my monumental inscription.
... the people of the land of Akkad, the king of Elam, the king of Babylon, the king of the land of Sumer and Akkad,
... of the ...
... 23 sons of the king of Elam ...
Witness Remanni-Adad, ditto.
from Dur-Šarruken
300, the bodyguards;
As to Nabû-eṭir ...
Witness Inurta-šarru-uṣur, 'third man.'
... in the hand of his servant
The palace of Bel-šarru-uṣur, the crown prince of the Succession Palace, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, king of Assyria.
I have given to the servants of the king, my lord,
in the Palace of Succession ...
Bel-epuš, the son of Bel-ibni, a servant of the king, my lord, who is with Aššur-... , has told me: "The son of Bel-ibni is in the presence of Aššur-... , and he has told him: 'The son of Bel-ibni is in the presence of Aššur-... '"
... who is in the presence of the king, my lord, ... , and who is ... , may the king, my lord, not say: "Why did he not come?"
before the gods ...
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord; let the king, my lord, question him, and may he tell the king, my lord, how the matter is.
3 ... ;
in the temple of Marduk, lord of Babylon, ...
1 seah 1 'litre' of wine;
The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Yahalu, son of Aya-ila'i, his brother, his son, ...
The king, my lord, knows that the land of the Urarṭians is very extensive. The Urarṭian troops are stationed on the border of Mannea.
Witness Pan-Issar-lamur.
... of the mountain ...
Esaggil, “House whose top is high”: the house of the divine Sebetti, the house of the divine Sebetti, the house of the divine Sebetti, the house of the divine Sebetti, the house of the divine Sebetti, the house of the divine Sebetti, the house of the divine Sebetti, the house of the divine Sebetti, the house of the divine Sebetti, the house of the divine Sebetti, the house of the divine Sebetti, the house of the divine Sebetti, the house of the divine Seb
Witness Nabû-eriba, horse trainer of the open chariotry.
If you should sin against this treaty of Aššur-dān, king of Assyria, and the great gods, your lords, and if you should not guard this treaty of Aššur-dān, king of Assyria, and the great gods, your lords, and if you should not guard this treaty of Aššur-dān, king of Assyria, and the great gods, your lords, and if you should not guard this treaty of Aššur-dān, king of Assyria, and the
The Lady of Babylon who is dressed in red garments and who is clothed in fire, is Marduk, when he burns in the fire. He burns in the fire and is clothed in fire.
The son of Zerî is staying in the city of Dur-Šarruken. The king, my lord, should know (this).
From this day, the 10th day of this month, the month ... of this year, to the 9th day of the month ... of this year,
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments...
Witness Abi-ul-idi, ...
of the son of Yakin ...
The 'path' is curled on the right and on the left...
... of the magnates.
... the heart of the city ...
An estate of 1 hectare of land in the town of ...
The leftovers from before the king, my lord, are ... ; the governor of ... has taken them and given them to Bel-aplu-iddina.
... I sent ... to the land of the Medes, and they brought him to me. I asked him: "Where are the Manneans?" He said: "The Manneans are in the mountains."
The 11th day: at court, favorable.
1 woman from Arrapha;
If he does not pay, it shall increase by a fourth.
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Mannu-ki-... , ...
91 cows of silver, 33 cows of silver, 33 cows of silver, 33 cows of silver, 33 cows of silver, 33 cows of silver, 33 cows of silver, 33 cows of silver, 33 cows of silver, 33 cows of silver, 33 cows of silver, 33 cows of silver, 33 cows of silver, 33 cows of silver, 33 cows of silver, 33 cows of silver,
3 2-seah jars of hinhinu-seeds;
his sons ...
... the crown prince ...
Month Shebat (XI), 1st day, eponym year of Dananu.
100 (homers) of barley belonging to Bahianu, at the disposal of Nabû-duru-uṣur.
... the one who is assiduous towards your place (of worship), the one who reveres you,
... in the city of ...
Should Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, strive and plan? Should he with his army and camp take the road and go to the district of Egypt, as he wishes?
Witness Šulmu-šarri.
I put to the sword the population of the city Ḫirimmu, a dangerous enemy, and I did not spare a single one. I hung their corpses on poles and placed (them) around the city. I reorganized that district (i 55) (and) imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the gods of Assyria, my lords.
I have sent a letter to the Palace. May the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
with ...
Month of Tishri (VII), 18th day.
30 homers of wine, 10 homers of wine, 10 homers of wine, total 50 homers, belonging to Zabinu, at the disposal of Nabû-aplu-iddina.
... to the land of the Medes, ... the land of the Manneans, ... the land of the Urarṭians, ... the land of the Yasubigallians, ... the land of the Zikirteans, ... the land of the Ullubu, ... the land of the Ullusunu, ... the land of the Ullusunu, ... the land of the Ullusunu, ... the land of the Ullusunu, ... the land of the Ullusunu, ... the land of the Ullusunu, ...
Ahu-iddina,
... ,
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
... of the land of Akkad ...
... the chariot ...
Now then ...
... and the rest of the camp
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether Assurbanipal, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria,
Nabû-...
Now then I am sending to you Bel-duri, the bodyguard.
total 4 ...
... in my presence ...
adjoining the field of Ša-Nanaya,
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. Good health to the king, my lord!
The land of the king is well; the forts are well. The king, my lord, can be glad.
(As for) the one who destroys an inscribed object bearing my name, the name of my father, the name of my grandfather, (and) the name of my brother, may the great divine lord, the god Marduk, glare at him angrily among all of the rulers, and make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the land. May he have no pity on him forever, and may he not allow him to stand over his enemy with triumph and victory. May he not allow him to stand over his enemy in triumph and victory, and may he not allow him
Now ...
9 girls, of 4 spans' height;
As to the chariot owners about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Send word that they be summoned and brought to me!" — I have sent word, and they are now being brought to me.
1, the scholars in the service of the governor,
... -belu-uṣur, ...
2 homers of small bread-loaves;
To the governor, my lord: your servant Balasî. Good health to the governor, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the governor, my lord!
I received ... from the land of the distant Medes, ... , horses, mules, Bactrian camels, oxen, and sheep and goats, without number. I received (them) in the land Gala... , which is on the border of the land Bīt-Bunakki.
35 horses trained to the yoke from the commander-in-chief;
From 1100 ...
1 mina, Nabû-... ;
40 1-year-old,
The former governors of the land of the Manneans, the Medes and the Scythians, the king's subjects, have been brought to me. I have received them and am herewith sending them to the king, my lord.
To the vizier, my lord: your servant Nabû-zeru-iddina. Good health to the vizier, my lord!
Witness Il-taklak.
5 Kushite horses from the Palace have come in.
... of the meal
... the 'finger' is abnormally small ...
May Aššur, Šamaš, Adad, Ber and the Assyrian Ištar, Šarrat-nipha, Šarrat-eqi, Nusku, Šamaš-šumu-ukin, Aya, Kusu, Nergal and Laṣ,
To the king, my lord: your servant Balasî. Good health to the king, my lord!
Nabû-eriba, Naṣiru,
they will ...
Witness Nabû-eriba, 'third man.'
in ...
... to the horses of the king, my lord.
Venus ...
... the front ...
... the Puqudu
... of the queen
... the land of ...
... they are ... in their presence.
... the governor
... their ... s ...
The palace of Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II), king of Assyria, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also king of Assyria: booty of the land of the people of the city Ḫindānu.
... the temple of the palace
... the land of Akkad
... of Nabû-naṣir, the ...
... the ... of the land of ... is in the presence of Aššur-... and Aššur-šallim. The servants of the king, my lord, ...
When the king, my lord, was staying overnight in the city of ... ,
... this
... to his son, his son to his son.
1, (of) Izbu;
May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, then I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made him (lit. “his land”) bow down to the yoke of my lordship. I imposed upon him hostages, tribute, and payment, and imposed upon him the same (obligation) as the kings, my ancestors, had imposed on Irḫulēnu, the Mannean.
The city of the goddess Ištar.
If a planet becomes visible in Elul (VI): the king of Elam will die.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
... the ... of the magnates
... the 'path' is present...
... the land of Arbela
... of the land of the governor
a cup of ...
... to the king, my lord, ...
... Iau-bi'di
10 Kushite horses from Assur.
... ayu, governor;
Month of Šabāṭu (XI), eponymy of Bēl-emuranni, governor of the city Šabirešu (650).
10 minas of silver ...
... I have not seen. The ... of the land of ...
... has contracted and bought it from NN, the eunuch of the governor of ...
... the king, my lord, ...
Witness Haldi-ahu-uṣur, horse trainer of the royal bodyguard.
Your servant Samnuha-beli-uṣur: I would gladly die for the grand vizier, my lord! Say to my lord:
I had a stele made, and had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, written on it. I had (this stele) placed before the god Aššur, my lord, and (then) I had my royal image engraved on it.
... Sîn-šarra-uṣur ...
of Dannaya ...
... in the middle of the door, in the place where the door bolt is placed, there is a hole. The upper part is elevated. The lower part ...
in the days of ...
... the palace of the city
I had a stele made, and had all the mighty victories that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, written on it. I had (it) placed before the god Aššur, my lord.
with him, saying: "...
From Nabû-iqbi.
... of the land of Aššur-reṣuwa.
... the land of Akkad ...
... -zeru-ibni, his son,
Witness Aššur-le'i, 'third man.'
Issar-nadin-apli ...
All the work on the palace is finished. The crown prince has entered the palace. He has  gone to the bedroom. I have entered the palace. I have seen the crown prince.
Nabû-eriba,
... Se'-abu'a ...
The woman Yabibê, who is placed before Šamaš, is his sister. She has given birth to him.
(As to) the work on the ziggurat of the gods of the king, my lord,
the writing-board ...
... to you
... the king, my lord
... Bel-duri
... the ... of the land of ...
1 ox, 1 spring lamb, 1 ...
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
The king should not be afraid of it.
Sasî, ... ;
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, and whom Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, has taken into his entourage,
... temple ...
At that time, in the reign of a previous king, bad omens(s) occurred in the land. The people living there were answering each other yes (for) no (and) were telling lies. They led their gods away, neglected their goddesses, abandoned their rites, (and) embraced quite different (rites). They put their hands on the possessions of Esagil, the palace of the gods, an inaccessible place, and sold the gold, silver, precious stones, (and) precious stones of the land at market value to the land Elam.
On the 10th day, when the ... s of the king, my lord, came, they brought ... to me. I gave them to the ... of the king, my lord, and they took it and went to the Palace.
... seah of 8 'litres'
In the time of your father, the father who had engendered you, the people of your land were not submissive to the yoke. They did not obey the king, your father, and did not bring their tribute to the city of your father. They were constantly plundering the land of Akkad and the land of the king, my lord. They were constantly robbing the people of the land of Akkad and the land of the king, my lord. They were constantly plundering the people of the land of Akkad and the land of the king, my lord.
Disregard that ...
(As for) the one who erases my inscribed name or the name of my favorite brother by some crafty device, may the god Aššur, my lord, overthrow his sovereignty (and) make his name (and) seed disappear from the land.
I ... to their ...
I received tribute from Mugallu, the Melidean: (10) 1,000 horses, 2,000 mules, 1,000 donkeys, 5,000 camels, 80,000 oxen, and 1,000,000 sheep and goats. I placed a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over them and imposed upon him (the same amount of) tribute as if (it were) Assyrian.
— It is seen in the path of the sun.
On the 10th of Elul (VI) I shall be in Babylon.
... the king, my lord, ...
The word of the king, my lord, ...
... the palace ... the people ... the people ... the people ... the people ... the people ... the people ... the people ... the people ... the people ... the people ... the people ... the people ... the people ... the people ... the people ... the people ...
... to the land of Akkad
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did he not come to me?" I am now writing to the king, my lord: He is in his presence. I have sent my messenger to the king, my lord, saying: "He is in your presence." If it pleases the king, my lord, let him come and stay with me, and let me send my messenger to the king, my lord, saying: "The king, my lord, has sent me his messenger."
... are keeping watch over them.
In the top of the right surface of the 'finger' there is a hole. The top of the right surface of the 'finger' is split...
x minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish, belonging to Šep-Issar,
The mountain (region) between the cities Šasila and Mašḫaṭ-šarri on the opposite bank of the Lower Zab, the land of the extensive Qutu, the land of the extensive Medes, the land of the extensive Manneans, the land of the extensive Cimmerians, the land of the extensive Egypt, the land of the extensive Kush, the land of the extensive Qedar, the land of the extensive Ḫatti, the land of the extensive Nairi, the land of the extensive Uqumanu, the land of the extensive ��
Witness Nabû-šumu-iddina, chariot driver.
... sent him ...
Now then I am sending to you Šamaš-šumu-ukin, son of Ubru-Nabû, the bodyguard.
Total 598 horses trained to the yoke.
The palace of Sargon (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad.
Assurbanipal, the crown prince of the Succession Palace, who is now ill, and on whom the 'hand' of Nanaya of Uruk is being placed in extispicy —
If a planet stands in the halo of the moon: the king of the land will exercise complete dominion.
We have now sent the bodyguard with the men to the king, our lord. Let the king, our lord, question them. If they are from the Inner City, let the king, our lord, question them about the work on the ziggurat of the Inner City. If they are from Dur-Šarruken, let the king, our lord, question them about the work on the ziggurat of Dur-Šarruken.
I have sent ...
14 ... ;
Nabû-šarru-uṣur, ditto ditto;
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, scribe.
... my brother, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of N
Now then I am sending to you my messenger. Do whatever is opportune to do, be it to block the canal or to subjugate those people.
Ikūnum, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Erišum (I), vice-regent of Aššur:
8 1/2 ... ;
The Ukkean (and) the Tabalean have written to me: "The king of Elam has ... ed against us."
The leftovers from before.
Moreover, I have heard that ... is coming to ... , and that the king of Elam is coming to me. I am sending this letter to the king, my lord, on the 16th of Tammuz (IV); let the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
Land of the Palace Herald ...
I mustered the numerous troops of the god Aššur and crossed the Tigris (and) Euphrates Rivers when they were at flood level, (and) marched over difficult mountains like a wild bull. I conquered the cities of the land of the Medes, whose number I did not know, and I brought their people, together with their possessions, to Assyria. I took away their horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty. I destroyed, devastated, (and) turned into ru
As to the work on the ziggurat of the goddess Ištar of Arbela, I have brought up the first course of bricks and deposited them in the foundations. I have also brought up the second course of bricks and deposited them in the foundations.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. The very  best of health to the king, my lord!
Afterwards, Teumman, the (very) image of a gallû-demon, sat on the throne of Urtaku. He constantly sought out evil (ways) to kill the children of Urtaku (and) the children of Ummanaldašu (Ḫumban-ḫaltaš II), the brother of Urtaku. Ummanigaš, Ummanappa, (and) Tammarītu — the sons of Urtaku, the king of the land Elam — Kudurru (and) Parrû — (iv 15) (the
1 wooden incense holder;
... of the king ...
Witness Mannu-ki-Arbail, ...
... now
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king will make his throne last long.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether these men or their sons or their brothers or any relative of theirs, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Kakkullanu and his sons,
Witness Nabû-šallim.
a writing-board ...
(As for) Edurgina, the dwelling of the god Bēl-ṣarbi that is inside of Baṣ, he took its name from the land Gambulu, which is inside of the land Ḫalzi, and gave (it) to the god Bēl-ṣarbi, his lord. He built (and) completed (it) from its foundation(s) to its crenellations (and) filled (it) with splendor.
from the town of ...
To the goddess Ištar of Uruk, lady of the lands, his lady: Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, (and) king of the four quarters (of the world), son of Sennacherib, king of the world (and) king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of the world (and) king of Assyria, renovated Eanna (“House of Heaven”), the temple of highest rank, for the sake of his life, and made (it) shine like
On the 27th the king goes down to the House of God.
... the ... s of the land of Akkad, which are in Babylon,
To the king of the lands, my lord: your servant, Bel-ušezib. May Bel, Nabû and Šamaš bless the king, my lord.
... Marduk-šarru-uṣur ...
... of the heart ...
If the moon becomes visible on the 30th day: the king of the Westland will fall in battle.
The messenger of the city of ... has come to me, saying: "The people of the city of ... are plotting against the king's subjects."
Witness Abi-lešir.
... they will go
Now, in the reign of a previous king, bad omens(s) occurred in Assyria and the land was full of rebellion. The people living there were answering each other yes (for) no (and) were telling lies. They led their gods away, neglected their goddesses, abandoned their rites, (and) embraced quite different (rites). They put their hands on the possessions of Esagil, the palace of the gods, an inaccessible place, and sold the gold, silver, precious stones, (and) precious objects at market value to the land Elam.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Total, 60,000 stalks of vine in the town of Abnana.
Disregard that the day is overcast and it has rained...
the men ...
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
... the great gods ...
Nabû-šarru-uṣur, ...
Seal of Nabû-šumu-uṣur, son of Nabû-zeru-lešir.
If Venus becomes visible in the path of the Enlil stars: the king of Akkad will die, and Adad will devastate; ... will diminish.
If a fog rolls in Kislev (IX) on the 15th day: the flood will come and irrigate the fields; a flood of water will carry off the harvest.
... of the camp
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
of Aššur-nirka-uṣur, son of NN.
Anu and Antu, the Great Gods, Šunipuru, the Narudi, Šalimtu, Šunipuru, the Narudi, Šalimtu, the Narudi, Šalimtu, the Narudi, Šalimtu, the Narudi, Šalimtu, the Narudi, Šalimtu, the Narudi, Šalimtu, the Narudi, Šalimtu, the Narudi, Šalimtu, the Narudi, Šalimtu, the Narudi, Šalimtu, the Narudi, Šalimtu
1 (for) the image of the goddess Ištar of Arbela, 1 (for) the image of the god Nabû, 1 (for) the image of the god Nusku,
200, Nineveh;
Witness NN.
before ...
... the 'station' ...
... the royal bodyguard ...
If on the 14th day the moon and sun are seen together: the king will exercise complete dominion; his land will submit to him; the king will have no rival; the gods will listen to prayers; there will be truth in the land; the king will make his throne last long.
If a planet becomes visible in the path of the sun: there will be an eclipse of the king of Akkad.
An estate of 1 hectare of land in the town of ...
... his people
The moon will be seen on the 14th day; good for Assyria, bad for Akkad and the Westland.
10 hectares, the town of ... ;
Sasî, his servant —
... to the town of the goddess
— Jupiter stands in the halo of the moon.
From Bulluṭu.
Nergal-nirka-da''in, his servant —
... he will ...
of ...
I received a substantial payment from the land of the people of the city Ḫindānu, the land of the people of the city Ḫimme, the land of the people of the city Ḫupapanu, the land of the people of the city Ḫindānu, the land of the people of the city Ḫimme, the land of the people of the city Ḫupapanu, the land of the people of the city Ḫindānu, the land of the people of the city Ḫ
... x minas for 100 (homers) of grain ...
1/2 mina, 1/2 mina, 1/4 mina;
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, changed or altered the proceedings, or jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
I, Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, son of Sennacherib, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, descendant of Tiglath-pileser (II), great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, descendant of Aš
The palace of Ashurnasirpal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also great king, strong king, king of the world, (and) king of Assyria; the one who reveres the great gods, the one who is assiduous towards their places (of worship), the one who is assiduous towards their
... of the king, my lord, to the land of the Palace Herald, saying: "Let the king, my lord, appoint you in the service of Aššur-belu-taqqin, and let him give you the people of the Palace Herald and the Inner City, so that you can give them to the king, my lord."
City of the goddess Ištar, Arbela!
... -eriba, his son, adolescent;
The daughter of the king, my lord, is doing very well indeed.
The 1st day: "... "
Month Tammuz (IV), 20th day, eponym year of Arbail-ili.
Month ... , 8th day, eponym year of Aššur-da''inanni.
Total 78 horses ...
The tribute of the Medes, of the land Ellipi, and of the land Bīt-Zualzaš, as far as the land Gambulu, which is on the border of the land Bīt-Zualzaš, and the tribute of the land Bīt-Zualzaš, which is on the border of the land Gambulu, and the tribute of the land Bīt-Zualzaš, which is on the border of the land Gambulu, and the tribute of the land Bīt-Zualzaš, which is
Witness Sin-aplu-iddina, horse trainer of the open chariotry.
The messenger of the king, my lord, who went to the Urarṭian (and) who came back and told me: "The Urarṭian has captured the messenger of the king, my lord" —
If a planet comes near and stands there: the king of Elam will die, and his country will revolt against him.
... my ...
1 woman (assigned) to Aya-ila'i.
... they ...
... to his son ...
The servants of the king, my lord, ... to the governor of ...
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, changed or altered the proceedings, or jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
I have not yet received ...
... I have not yet received
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ahhe-šallim. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
La-qepu, ...
... of the country
I have not yet received the rest of the horses from the ... of the chief cupbearer.
40 horses of the ... of the king, my lord, have come to me. I have given them to Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the royal bodyguard.
Witness Abi-ul-idi. Witness Urdu-Nanaya.
... the 7th day, the 8th day ...
The goddess Ištar who resides in the city Arbela, who is clothed in fire (and) cloaked in awe-inspiring radiance, who rains down fire upon the land of the enemy, who burns the enemy, who ... s the enemy, who makes the enemy land tremble, who ... s the enemy, who dwells in Eanna, the temple of the divine Sebetti, the temple of the divine Kidmuru, the temple of the divine Kidmuru, the temple of the divine Kidmuru, the temple of the divine Kidmuru,
To the king, my lord: your servant Balasî. Good health to the king, my lord!
... the royal bodyguard
Balaṭî ...
and the son of Nabû-apil-kumu'a ...
Witness ...
... the king, my lord
Witness Ibašši-ilani.
... of the women
of the king, my lord, ...
Ubrî, son of Ahu-duri, gardener; 1 woman; 1 daughter; 1 son; 1 house; 1 threshing-floor; 1 garden.
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the four quarters (of the world), king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, great king, strong king, king of the four quarters (of the world), king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the four quarters (of the world), king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), great king, strong king, king of the four quarters (of the world), king of Assyria, favorite of the great gods, perfect hero
20 minas of silver, capital, belonging to Remanni-Adad, chariot driver, at the disposal of Nabû-eriba, deputy of the palace scribe, and Šamaš-iqiša, deputy of the palace scribe.
I placed at their service the eunuchs, the bearded courtiers, the scholars, the scribes, the exorcists, the physicians, the augurs, the diviners, the lamentation priests, the singers, the dancers, the cupbearers, the confectioners, the bakers, the cooks, the confectioners, the bakers, the cupbearers, the confectioners, the bakers, the brewers, the cupbearers, the confectioners, the bakers, the cupbearers, the confectioners, the
... Third extispicy...
an estate of 3 decares of field adjoining the road of the wadi of Bel-ibni,
As to the king, my lord's order: "The horses should come to me," they have come. I have received them and given them to the king, my lord. I have also received the mules which the king, my lord, sent to me.
20 hectares of land, care of Nergal-apil-kumu'a.
... of the land of the king
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord!
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "... " — I have sent ... to the Inner City.
... his/their ...
... of the people of the land of Akkad
May Ea, king of the apsû, lord of the springs, lord of the underworld, lord of the netherworld,
... to the place where ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Give 200  (regular) horses and 50 cavalrymen to the king of Elam. Let the  king of Elam give 200 horses and 50 cavalrymen to the king, my lord, and let the king, my lord, give 200 horses and 50 cavalrymen to the king of the Gurreans. Let the king, my lord, give 200 horses and 50 cavalrymen to the king of the Itu'eans,
I have given out the corn rations and the straw. Now let the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
of the palace of the king ...
Adad-nārārī, king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, son of Šamšī-Adad V, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Shalmaneser (III), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria:
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
From Rašil, son of Nurzanu.
total — the goddess Ištar of Arbela.
Total 201, in the charge of Abda',
until ...
... Aššur-belu-taqqin ...
The enemy ...
... of silver, on a tray ...
... to the king, my lord.
From Balasî.
... to the king
... to me
Iqiša-...
The shepherd of the sheep.
When the son of Yakin went to Elam, he took with him the son of Nabû-uṣalla, the son of Nabû-uṣalla ...
... I have not yet received the rest of the horses from the Urarṭians.
the men of ...
... the king ...
... the hand of ...
The 'well-being' is present. The upper part ...
The day that he brings the silver, he shall redeem his land.
If the king of Elam, who is now ill, should die, will the ... of the king of Elam, who is now ill, die with him?
... to you
As to the work on Aššur-šallim-ahhe, the son of Aššur-reṣuwa, about which you wrote, I have sent him to the Palace.
As for me, Sennacherib, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, I had a kettledrum of reddish bronze, cast by the god Ninagal, skillfully made for my life, the prolongation of my days, my happiness, the securing of my reign, (and) the well-being of my offspring, and I had (it) firmly placed before the god Aššur, my lord.
Witness Aššur-reṣuwa, horse trainer of the palace.
... of their land
... is the king's word. Whoever in the future, at any time,
... the 'path' is present...
of the orchard ...
Witness Šamaš-šallim.
To the god Aššur, his lord: Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, presented (this).
and Nabû-nadin-šumi ...
If the sky shouts and the earth quakes: the cultivated fields will diminish; the date palms will not prosper; the Westland will diminish.
the son of 4 spans' height ...
I have sent my messenger to the Palace. As soon as he returns, I shall write to you whatever news there is.
... the palace ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
The king, my lord, should ask the son of NN, the son of NN, and the son of NN. They are the sons of the king, my lord.
A tablet of NN to the king, my lord. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
Nabû-nadin-apli, son of Nabû-eṭir-...
... -apli, ... -ereš, NN, NN,
Witness Zarutî, cohort commander.
Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan) ...
... the men of the deputy (governor)
Witness Abda', ...
I have now written to you: Do not be negligent but attentive! Do not be careless but circumspect! Do not be negligent but attentive!
The money is paid completely. That vineyard is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Month Tishri (VII), ... th day, eponym year of Nabû-ahu-uṣur.
Bel-ereš, a servant of Marduk-apla-iddina —
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity,
Witness Aplî.
The son of Yakin ... to the governor of ...
Witness Nabû-šumu-uṣur, village manager.
I have written to you; do not neglect to keep me informed!
As to the work on the ziggurat of the Inner City about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... the ziggurat ... !" — I have done as the king, my lord, wrote to me. I have not ... ed the ziggurat ...
... the son of Yakin
all Gurreans ...
... and they will not obey us.
10 ... ;
... their ... s, saying: "...
... of the men
Ditto by Ištar of Arbela and Ištar of Nineveh!
In the future, may one of the sons, grandsons, (great grand)sons, or (great, great grand)sons, one of the kings, my descendants, whom the god Aššur and the goddess Ištar nominate for ruling over the land and people, renovate its dilapidated section(s) when that temple becomes dilapidated and old.
Witness Mar-qamu, royal bodyguard.
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Now then I have sent to you two messengers of the king, my lord.
Adad-nārārī, king of the universe, son of Arik-dīn-ili, king of Assyria, son of Enlil-nārārī (who was) also king of Assyria:
Witness Ubru-Aššur, porter.
Abi-hari, eunuch of Adad-nadin-apli,
... the king, my lord, ...
The palace of ... , son of ... , son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of NN
2 ditto ... ;
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
“The Enlil of the Gods” (Marduk), “The King of the Four Quarters” (Nergal), “The One Who Exorcises the Hosts of the Ubšukkina” (Šamaš), “The One Who Exorcises the Hosts of the Igīgū and Anunnakū gods” (Sîn), “The One Who Exorcises the Hosts of the Abyss” (Aššur), “The One Who Exorcises the Hosts of the Underworld” (Ea), “
Nabû-na'id (and) Babilayu, the envoys of Teumman, the king of the land Elam, who brought the letter to Esarhaddon, your lord, and who have been staying in Assyria since the 10th day, have now come to me with a letter from Aššur-šarru-uṣur, the messenger of Teumman, the king of the land Elam.
Bel-lu-balaṭ,
Witness NN. Witness Barruqu.
NN has contracted and bought it from Nabû-...
Witness Abi-qamu.
all of it to ...
... to the eunuch ...
In the month of Tammuz (IV), on the 1st day,
total, the goddess Ištar of the Arabs.
of their ...
I have sent their people to the Palace.
The king of Elam ...
A tablet of Nabû-sagab to the palace scribe. Good health to my lord!
I have now written to you: Do not be negligent ... !
Nabû-eriba, son of Nabû-šuma-iškun, ...
The silver shall increase by a fourth.
Total 23 horses.
Month Ab (V), 16th day, eponym year of ...
The day that the governor of Arrapha comes to me, I shall send a detailed report to the king, my lord.
... the men of the land of ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-šumu-ka''in. Good health to the king, my lord!
The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number. The heart of the sheep is normal.
If you should sin against this treaty of Aššur-nerari, king of Assyria, and the great gods, your lord, and if you should not guard this treaty of Aššur-nerari, king of Assyria, and the great gods, your lord, and if you should remove the name of Aššur-nerari, king of Assyria, and the name of his sons and his grandsons from the treaty of the great gods, your lord, and if you should not guard this treaty of Aššur-nerari, king of
I have now written to the king, my lord; let the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
1 huziqūtu-garment of linen;
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial payment from the distant Medes, of whose land none of the kings, my ancestors, had heard mention. (Thus) I made them bow down to the yoke of my lordship.
... -apli, ...
... therein
And now, if it is acceptable to the king, my lord, let them bring me the rest of the people of the house of Zakiru, and I will bring them to the king, my lord.
40 sheep ...
The king, my lord, knows that the ... of the governor of Arrapha
Nabû-šumu-iddina, scribe.
May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
... to five sons of his.
... the house of ...
who came ...
... they have not yet ...
... who
Concerning the people of the son of Yakin about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me:
I had a bridge constructed opposite the Citadel Gate by packing down paving stones of white limestone for my lordly processions.
I built anew Esagil, the palace of the gods, (and) completed its designs. I brought the deities Sîn, Ningal, Šamaš, Aya, (and) Ištar, the gods who support me, inside it and made (them) dwell on (their) eternal dais(es). I completed the rites of the god Sîn, my lord, (and) established regular offerings for him. I made the goddess Ištar, who resides in the city Arbela, enter into her temple and made (her) sit
Witness Nabû-zeru-lešir, horse trainer of the ša-šepi guard.
The money is paid completely. That land is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Witness ... -apli, of the town of the town.
... the eclipse which took place
If the Pleiades come close to the top of the moon and stand there: the king of Akkad will exercise complete dominion; his land will submit to him.
... seized ...
their ... s ...
... Aššur-šarru-uṣur
To the king, my lord: your servant Mannu-ki-Adad. Good health to the king, my lord!
... nu, ... of the enemy ...
As to Bel-iddina about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... his sons ...
Witness NN, son of Nabû-ereš.
The king, my lord, knows that the gods of the king, my lord, have been made manifest to me. I have seen the king, my lord's gods in the sky, and they have given me confidence. I have seen the king, my lord's gods in the sky, and they have given me confidence. I have seen the king, my lord's gods in the sky, and they have given me confidence.
Ditto, whose thighs are a gazelle in the plain! Refrain.
to the king, my lord ...
... the brothers ...
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Sagab (651).
the rest ...
seal of NN, ... ,
Nabû-zeru-lešir
... of the country of GN
I have heard that you are afraid of the king, my lord, and that you are afraid of the army. I have heard that you are afraid of the king, my lord, and that you are afraid of the army.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... the forts
the man of the land of ...
Aya-...
... the upper part ...
One litre of bread, one litre of beer, a bowl of wine, a bowl of oil, a bowl of honey, a bowl of ghee, a bowl of sesame oil, a bowl of chick-peas,
The goddess Ištar who resides in the city Arbela, who is clothed in fire (and) cloaked in awe-inspiring radiance, who rains down fire upon the land of the enemy, who burns the enemy, and who has gathered to herself (all) divine offices of highest rank —
... the land of the king of Elam ...
Disregard that ... to the kings of the land ...
... the land of Akkad
Your servant Nabû-belu-ka''in: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
If the moon becomes visible on the 30th day: the king of the Westland will fall in battle.
Witness Nabû-naṣir, horse trainer of the palace.
of the estate of Aya-ila'i, adjoining the road of the wadi of the town of Zabinu,
Samsi, queen of the Arabs, ... who had come to an agreement with ... , and who had sent her daughter to the land of the Nabayateans, ...
The day that he brings the audience gift to me, I will bring the audience gift to Nabû. I will bring the audience gift to Nabû, and Nabû will give ... to the king, my lord. I will bring the audience gift to Nabû, and Nabû will give ... to the king, my lord. I will bring the audience gift to Nabû, and Nabû will give ... to the king, my lord. I will bring the audience gift to Nabû, and Nabû will give ... to the king, my lord. I will bring the audience gift
If the moon and sun are in opposition: the king of the land will widen his understanding.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
... the land of the king, my lord, and the king, my lord, ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
I have now written to you: Do not be negligent but attentive!
The day ...
... the fort ...
1/2 mina of the king ...
Witness Šumma-ilani.
1 prayer bowl ditto;
Moreover, I have heard that the king of Elam has written to the king of Babylon, saying: "Let us act together and march against the Assyrians."
... to the son of the king ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
The palace of Ilī-napištī-uṣur, the ša-napišti-official of the king, my lord, which is in the district of the city of the goddess Ištar of Arbela, which is in the district of the city of the goddess Ištar of the steppe, which is in the district of the city of the goddess Ištar of the steppe, which is in the district of the city of the goddess Ištar of the steppe, which is in the district of the city of the goddess Ištar
I have now written to the Palace. If it pleases the Palace, let them send word that they should bring me the rest of the tribute, and I will pay the silver in full to the Palace.
5 talents, Arraphaeans.
Bel-epuš, the son of the rab mūgi, has been staying in the house of his brother, and his brother has been staying in the house of the rab mūgi. The king, my lord, should know (this).
1 house, 1 threshing-floor, 1 garden, 1 well, 1 cistern, 1 orchard, 1 house, 1 threshing-floor, 1 garden, 1 well, 1 house, 1 threshing-floor, 1 garden, 1 house, 1 threshing-floor, 1 garden, 1 house, 1 threshing-floor, 1 garden, 1 house, 1 threshing-floor, 1 garden, 1 house, 1 threshing-floor,
Month Iyyar (II), 1st day, eponym year of Banbâ, the  prefect of the city of Arrapha.
The messenger of the Urarṭian (king) has come to me, saying: "The troops of the Urarṭian king have been defeated on the border of Mannea. The messenger of the Mannean has come to me, saying: 'The troops of the Urarṭian king have been defeated on the border of Mannea.'"
On my third campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me and I marched to the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians, a dangerous enemy who since Tukriš (I) had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors. In the mountains, difficult terrain, I rode on horseback and had my personal chariot carried on (men’s) necks. In very rugged terrain I roamed about on foot like a wild bull. I surrounded, conquered, destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire the cities of the
... I have written
Month of Sîn (III), 30th day, eponym year of Adad-nadin-aḫḫē,
Witness Bel-abu'a.
NN, ... of the son of NN, has contracted and bought it for x minas of silver.
7 big loaves;
I have written to the city lords of the Urarṭian, and they have told me: "The Urarṭian has written to us: 'Send me a detailed report on the work on the fort.'"
shall place 10 minas of silver and 5 minas of gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owner. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
When Aššur, the great lord, gave me the scepter of kingship and the people of the four quarters (of the world) came before me and kissed my feet, (when) I made the statues of the great gods, the divine Sebetti, the Narudi, the Šalimtu, the Šunipuru, the Lions, the Wild Bulls, the Thunderbirds, the Wild Ass, the Anzû, the Šakkan, the Šalimtu, the Wild Bulls, the Thunderbirds, the Wild Ass, the Lions,
... Babylon and Borsippa ...
The scribe of the palace supervisor of the king, my lord, has written to me: "Come and stay with me!"
We are the king's servants. We have no field, no house, no servant.
they are ...
Witness NN, royal bodyguard.
to Ea-šarru-ibni ...
... the great gods of heaven and earth ... the king ...
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur, eunuch.
The king, my lord, ... ; the king, my lord, ... the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN, the son of NN
The men of the king, my lord, who came ...
Mars is the star of the Westland; evil for the Westland and Elam. Saturn is the star of Akkad. It is good for Akkad, bad for Elam and the Westland.
The king should not say: "Why did you not write to me?"
On the 5th day: “The heroic one, the warrior of the gods,” a lamentation. “The heroic one, the warrior of the gods,” an eršemma-lamentation to Aššur in the house of Dagan after the sheep offering. “The heroic one, the warrior of the gods,” a lamentation. “The heroic one, the warrior of the gods,” an eršemma-lamentation to Aššur in the house of Dagan.
... the land ... I received ... from the land ... I received ... from the land ... I received ... from the land ... I received ... from the land ... I received ... from the land ... I received ... from the land ... I received ... from the land ... I received ... from the land ... I received ... from the land ... I received ... from the land ...
Witness ... a.
In the future may a later prince, when that temple becomes dilapidated and he renovates (it), anoint my monumental inscriptions with oil, make a sacrifice, and return (them) to their places. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-bunaya.
As to the work on the ziggurat of the king, my lord, about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Do the work!" — I have done the work. I have built the ziggurat from top to bottom. I have deposited my monumental inscription and deposited the monumental inscriptions of the king, my lord.
Šamaš-kumu-...
The king of Elam heard about the advance of my expeditionary force and fear fell upon him. He abandoned the city Madaktu, a royal city of his, and (then) fled and took to the mountains (lit. “ascended his mountain”). I surrounded, conquered, plundered, destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire the cities Madaktu, Ḫaydala, (and) Ḫaydala-Ḫaršu, cities of his royal house, together with thirty small(er) settlements in their environs.
I wrote out an inscribed object bearing my name and the name of my father, and the name of the great lord, Marduk, and I deposited (it) for future days. I wrote out an inscribed object bearing the name of the great lord, Marduk, and deposited (it) for future days.
seal of Nabû-ahu-uṣur, scribe.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
The land of the chief eunuch ...
... -ahu-iddina, son of Ubru-Nabû,
2 before ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let the gods of the king, my lord, be well!" — the gods of the king, my lord, are well.
a ditto of olives;
I received horses from the land of the distant Medes, of whose land none of the kings, my ancestors, had heard mention.
Mannu-ki-...
you will make. Now ...
... of the land of Akkad
... his face
Good health to the king, my lord!
To the king, my lord: your servant Taklak-ana-Bel. Good health to the king, my lord!
... the land of the king
Ubru-Nabû, of the land of the Palace Herald,
... son of Nabû-kaṣir
The water for (washing) the hands which the king, my lord, makes the people of the country drink, is where the gods of the king, my lord, are staying. The gods of the king, my lord, are staying in the temple of Aššur. The water for (washing) the hands which the king, my lord, makes the people of the country drink, is where the gods of the king, my lord, are staying.
In the month Ayyāru (II), the month of the goddess Ištar of Uruk, the month of the god Sîn, the month of the god Nusku, the month of the goddess Šuzianna, the month of the goddess Ištar of Arbela, the month of the god Nergal, the month of the goddess Laṣ, the month of the god Nusku, the month of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, the month of the god Nusku, the month of the god Nusku, the month
Mannu-ki-Arbail, the ... of the land of the king, my lord, has ... ed the land of the king, my lord.
Bel-epuš, a servant of the chief cupbearer, has said to me: "I have been sent to you." I have not seen him.
The palace of Aššur-nārārī, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Išme-Dagan (II), vice-regent of the god Aššur: I had a stele made and had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, written on it.
... the king, my lord
Witness Šulmu-Aya.
Witness Kanunayu, palace scribe.
A tablet of ... -ereš to the king, my lord. Good health to the king, my lord!
The top of the left surface of the 'finger' ...
Month of Nisan (I), eponym year of Nabû-šar-ilani.
... they have been placed ...
Now, if the king, my lord, commands, let them come and stay with me, and let me do the work assigned to them. Why should I do it alone? I am a servant of the king, my lord, and I am loyal to the king, my lord.
Witness NN.
25 ditto, care of Nabû-zeru-ibni;
Witness ... -Nabû.
The ... of the king, my lord, is doing very well indeed; the king, my lord, can be glad indeed. The king, my lord, can be glad indeed. The king, my lord, can be glad indeed.
The news of the Urarṭian is excellent. The messenger who goes and comes back has seen him.
... of Nabû-šuma-iddina, son of Abi-yaqiya
1 seah 1 'litre' of spiced bread; a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
... to the people
... of the day
The palace of Ashurbanipal, king of the four quarters (of the world), son of Esarhaddon, king of the four quarters (of the world), governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, favorite of the great gods, perfect heir, king of the four quarters (of the world), king of the four quarters (of the world), the one who reveres the great gods, the one who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, the one who is assiduous towards the rites of the great gods, the one
... years
... the palace herald
Disregard what they speak with their mouths, or what they are thinking...
... to Nabû'a
Let them come and pluck out the ... of the land of Akkad.
The chief eunuch, the chief cook, the chief confectioner, the chief baker, the chief brewer, the chief of the cupbearers, the chief of the fodder supplies, the chief of the granaries, the chief of the stores, the chief of the stores for the garrison troops, the chief of the stores for the cavalry, the chief of the stores for the chariot troops, the chief of the stores for the cavalry, the chief of the stores for the cavalry, the chief of the stores for the cavalry, the chief of the stores for the cavalry
An estate of 1 hectare of land ...
... they have ...
... the son of the king, saying: "... "
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
Bel and Nabû ...
100 cows of gold, ... of the camp.
The palace of Abdi-Milkūti, king of Sidon.
May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May Aššur, Mullissu, Šerua and Belet-ili give long days and everlasting years to the king, my lord!
Witness Mannu-ki-Adad, royal bodyguard.
May the king, my lord, not abandon me! I am a servant of the king, my lord, and I am loyal to the king, my lord.
Nabû-kenu-uṣur,
(As for) him (Hezekiah), I confined him inside the city Jerusalem, his royal city, like a bird in a cage. I set up blockades against him and (iii 30) made him dread exiting his city gate. I detached from his land the cities of his that I had plundered and I gave (them) to Mitinti, the king of the city Ashdod, Padî, the king of the city Ekron, and Ṣilli-Bēl, the king of the city Gaza, and (thereby) made his land smaller
If the moon becomes visible on the 30th day: there will be frost.
... I shall send ...
... will they march about for as many days as they wish, will they conquer a city of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, and will they, either by day or by night, enter that city, and will it be delivered to them?
Witness Riba-Daddî.
The troops of the Manneans, together with the troops of the Medes, have crossed over to Bit-Hamban. They have proceeded against Assyria, but have turned back from Assyria and are staying in Bit-Hamban.
and ... to him ...
I have sent two letters to the king, my lord.
May they grant to the king, my lord, happiness, joy, and a long life!
Witness Zarutî, chariot driver of the crown prince.
... my ...
Witness Sin-zeru-ibni, ...
Fingernail of Samsi-ila'i, owner of the house being sold.
with the king ...
If a planet becomes visible in the path of the stars of Anu: the king of Akkad will exercise complete dominion.
The palace of Tiglath-pileser, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (I), strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Mutakkil-Nusku (who was) also strong king, king of the universe (and) king of Assyria; the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, built Ešarra, completed its temple(s), (re)built Esag
sent ...
... and the land of Akkad
... before the Palace ...
Total, in the town of the bakers, in the district of the town of the Inner City.
Does your great divinity know it? Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Witness Nabû-eriba, cohort commander.
... the land ... I received ... I received ... I received ... I received ... I received ... I received ... I received ... I received ... I received ... I received ... I received ... I received ... I received ... I received ... I received ... I received ... I received ... I received ... I received ... I received ... I received ... I received ... I received ... I received ...
If the earth quakes at night: worry for the land, variant: abandonment of the land.
The 'station' is present. The 'path' on the left of the gall bladder ...
they are coming ...
... who ...
... Babylon and Borsippa ...
From Nabû-bel-šumati ...
The silver, gold, and precious stones of the royal treasure, as much as there was, which the king, my lord, had given to the citizens of Babylon, Borsippa, and Kutha, and which the citizens had sold for money — the king, my lord, should know (this).
Aya-rame, son of Aya-ila'i, has said to me: "I have heard that you are going to ... the land of the Manneans. Why do you not tell me the truth? ... the land of the Manneans ... the land of the Medes ... the land of the Manneans ... the land of the Medes ... the land of the Manneans ... the land of the Medes ... "
... 20 hectares of land in the town of Abi-...
From Zakiru.
Shalmaneser, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria:
Witness ...
Now, if you say: "I want to stay in Assyria," let me send my messenger to Esarhaddon, my lord, with this message: "I want to stay in Assyria." If Esarhaddon, my lord, says: "You may stay in Assyria," I will send my messenger to Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, with this message: "I want to stay in Assyria."
... Aššur-ila'i
Witness Ahu-duri,
500 sheep belonging to Bahianu, at the disposal of Zabinu-eriba.
If the moon becomes visible on the 30th day: there will be frost in the land.
Witness Iqišâ. Witness Apladadad-...
Bel-epuš, son of Nabû-... , servant of NN, son of NN, servant of NN,
... 16 of them
Month of Shebat (XI), 10th day, eponym year of Dananu.
On the 17th day the king goes down to the House of God. He illuminates the face. He performs a sheep offering before the king. He performs one before the king’s family. He performs one before the magnates.
adjoining ... ,
... Babylon and Borsippa
or Marduk-apla-iddina ...
Witness Riba-ilu.
Ditto by all the gods of the Inner City!
At that time, Nineveh, the exalted cult center, the city loved by the goddess Ištar in which all of the rituals for gods and goddesses are present; (30) (and) which earlier kings, my ancestors, had had constructed for their lordly dwelling, but whose construction they had carried out inexpertly — its wall had become old, its foundation had become weak, its superstructure had collapsed, and its wall had buckled.
6 oxen ...
... the gods of the king ...
... them
adjoining the field of Nabû-duru-uṣur,
of 1 hectare of land in the town of Aššur-nirka-uṣur,
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. Good health to the king, my lord!
If a fog rolls in on a cloudy day: fall of the king of Elam.
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. The very  best of health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the  king, my lord!
with the woman of the town ...
If a planet becomes visible in Kislev (IX): the harvest of the land will prosper; business will be steady.
When the god Aššur, the great lord, gave me the scepter of kingship and the crown of lordship, he commanded me to exercise dominion over Assyria and to subdue all the lands; he placed in my hand a strong weapon which fells the insubmissive, and he crowned me with a lofty crown. He made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises.
1 seah 1 'litre' of huhurrutu-type bread loaves;
If the king, my lord, commands: "Let them bury him where he dictates." Then let them bury him where he dictates, and let him lie where it was his wish. Wherever he lies you shall not disturb him, and you shall not raise your hand against him, to do him evil, because he is one who has deserved kindness and favour of the king, my lord.
The chariot which goes to the Akitu House and comes back has no driver. Without a driver it rocks about ...
... to the son ...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, and whom Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, has taken into his entourage,
of Su...
Witness Adad-eriba.
If the earth quakes at night: worry for the land, variant: abandonment of the land.
At that time, the temple of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, which is in the city Arbela, which Šamšī-Adad (III), son of Išme-Dagan (II), a king who preceded me, had previously built — that temple had become old, its walls had buckled, and its superstructure had collapsed.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... the land of Gagal
The chief eunuch, the chief of the fodder supplies, the chief of the granaries, the chief of the stores, the chief of the treasuries, the chief of the accounts, the chief of the household of the queen, the chief of the household of the crown prince, the chief of the household of the crown prince of the Succession Palace, the chief of the household of the crown prince of the Succession Palace, the chief of the household of the crown prince of the Succession Palace, the chief of the household of the crown prince of the Succession Palace, the chief of the household of the
... the magnates
(If) Venus becomes visible in the path of the Enlil stars: the king of Akkad will exercise complete dominion.
Your servant Aplaya: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: The king, my lord, can be glad indeed. The king, my lord, can be glad indeed. The king, my lord, can be glad indeed.
Witness Aplu-uṣur.
I had twelve gates opened up in it in four directions, in front and behind, (and) along both sides, for entering and leaving. I had an inner and outer wall built and I raised (them) as high as mountain(s). I made (them) reach up to the heavens like a mountain. I built (and) completed that palace in its entirety through the workmanship of the god Kulla, my lord.
Witness Nabû-ahu-uṣur, scribe.
Concerning the substitute king about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "He should sit (on the throne) until the 20th of Elul (VI)" —
2 houses in the town of Urad-Issar, adjoining the road of Urad-Issar and the road to Urad-Issar.
There is a hole in the place of the 'well-being.' The top of the gall bladder is split. The 'finger' is thick...
Total 4 horse trainers of the 'third men.'
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-alik-pani. Good health to the king, my lord!
I have written to the king, my lord; let the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
If Adad thunders on the day of disappearance of the moon: the harvest will prosper; business will be steady.
Month of Šamaš (IV), twenty-first day, eponymy of Banbâ, the eunuch.
The eunuchs of the king, my lord, who are in Elam, have been staying in Bit-Imbî. The king, my lord, knows that the Bit-Imbî is a dangerous place. The king, my lord, should know that the eunuchs of the king, my lord, who are in Bit-Imbî, are in danger. The king, my lord, should not say: "Why did you not write to me?" —
Total 5 persons, 1 vineyard, 1 vegetable garden,
I sent my messenger to Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II) regarding these matters. He detained the eunuch of mine whom I had sent (Marduk-šarru-uṣur) and did not give a reply to my word(s). He sent his own messenger to me, but did not give me any news of the king of the land Elam. I sent (Marduk-šarru-uṣur) to the king of the land Elam, but again did not get any news of the king of the land Elam.
Concerning the Arabs about whom you wrote, I have given them to you. Their sons ...
Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
I myself ascended (and) conquered the city Bīt-Kilamzaḫ, their fortified city. I brought out of it people, young (and) old, horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty. I destroyed, devastated, (and) turned into ruins their small(er) settlements, which were without number. I burned with fire pavilions (and) tents, their abodes, and reduced (them) to ashes.
11 shekels of silver of NN, the scribe.
The son of Aššur-nārārī, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Išme-Dagan (II), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Išme-Dagan (II) (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria:
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king will make his throne last long.
... -ili-ili
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial payment from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
Now then ...
... of ...
a bowl of salt, a bowl of ... ,
11 shekels of silver of ... ;
(As for) the sons of Teumman, I killed (them), chopped up their flesh, (and) sent (them) out to be a spectacle in all of the lands.
total, ...
1 ditto, ditto, the base of the middle 'finger' of the lung;
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: reliable speech; the land will become happy.
1 cow of silver;
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed. The judge shall not heed his case.
... the king of Babylon and the king of Elam
... I made him stand before me. I took away from him his royal throne and I made him sit bound at the feet of my throne. I took away from him his royal scepter and I gave (it) to Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, his favorite brother. I took away from him his royal garments and I gave (them) to Ištar-nandi, his favorite brother. I took away from him his royal chariot and I gave (it) to Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, his favorite brother. I took away from him his royal
(As for) the one who removes an inscribed object bearing my name from its place (and) does not place (it) with an inscribed object bearing his name, may the great gods of heaven and netherworld overthrow his kingship (and) make his name (and) seed disappear from the land. May he not have pity on him forever and may he not allow him to stand over his enemies in victory (or) triumph. May he not allow him to stand over his enemies in triumph (or) triumph. May he not allow him to stand over his enemies in victory (or) triumph. May
If he appoints him, as long as he holds this position, will he instigate an insurrection and rebellion against Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, and Assurbanipal, the crown prince of the Succession Palace, or cause others to instigate it? Does your great divinity know it?
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: reliable speech; the land will become happy.
2 minas, Nabû-šarru-uṣur, goldsmith.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
son of Udâ,
Instead of their seals they impressed their fingernails.
The heart of the sheep is normal. First extispicy...
Anu, Antu, the Great Gods, Šunipuru, Šalimtu, Šunipuru, Šalimtu, Šunipuru, Šalimtu, Šunipuru, Šalimtu, Šunipuru, Šalimtu, Šunipuru, Šalimtu, Šunipuru, Šalimtu, Šunipuru, Šalimtu, Šunipuru, Šalimtu, Šunipuru, Šalimtu, Šunipuru, Šalimtu, Šunipuru, Šal
Assurbanipal, king of the four quarters (of the world), who with the support of (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar, conquered his enemies, plundered the land of the Medes, and took away their settlements,
there ...
Abi-hari, reporter.
Land of the Palace Herald
... the town of Der
The day you see this letter, ...
... Month Adar (XII), 22nd day ...
On the 16th day of the month ... , the day ... , the moon ...
... with you
Nabû-apil-kumu'a has contracted and bought them for 30 shekels of silver.
... the king, my lord, ...
In the evening of the 12th day, the son of the king, my lord,
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the subject of this query, Esarhaddon, king of Assyria,
... sheep
A later prince, when that temple becomes dilapidated and he renovates (it), may he find an inscribed object bearing my name, and (then) anoint (it) with oil, make an offering, (and) place (it) with an inscribed object bearing his name. The god Marduk, the great lord, will (then) hear his prayers.
... they will come
May a later prince, when that temple becomes dilapidated and he renovates (it), anoint my monumental inscriptions with oil, make a sacrifice, and return (them) to their places. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... Arraphaeans ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
NN has contracted and bought it from Mušallim-... for x minas of copper.
... is the ... day. On the 29th day, the moon will be seen with the sun. It is good for Elam.
To the king, my lord: your servant Issar-nadin-apli. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May the great gods bestow long days, well-being and joy upon the king, my lord!
6, Nineveh ... ;
Witness Nabû-na'id, ...
Aššur-da''inanni, NN,
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
400 (homers) of wheat ...
If you should sin against this treaty of the king, my lord,
8 gardeners ... in the field ...
... of the bed which is covered with a cover
Gula of the steppe
As to the work on the ziggurat of the goddess Ištar of Arbela, I have finished the work on the ziggurat of the goddess Ištar of Arbela. I have built a ziggurat, a replica of a Hittite palace, a palace for the goddess Ištar of Arbela, my mistress, and deposited my monumental inscriptions.
I had a stele made, and ... my victory (and) triumph, as well as the praise of my heroism, written on it, and I erected (it) in the city Arbela, before the goddess Ištar, my mistress. I had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, written on it, and I left (it) there for ever after.
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: reliable speech; the land will become happy.
Month of ... , ... th day, eponym year of NN, governor of ...
... to me ...
... is his ... The ox is his innards.
... of the land of ...
... of the palace supervisor
in the mouth of ...
Witness Qibinnî.
... the Puqudu
Ashurnasirpal, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of Aššur: I conquered from the land of the Kassites as far as the land of the Yasubigallians on the border
... of theirs
they have been plotting ...
... of the father of the king
In the future may a later prince, when that wall becomes dilapidated and he renovates (it), anoint my monumental inscriptions with oil, make a sacrifice, and return (them) to their places. (Then) the god Šamaš will listen to his prayers.
Witness Mannu-ki-Arbail. Witness Hubašate.
Ditto by Anu and Antu! Ditto by Illil and Mullissu!
Nabû-šuma-iddina, son of Yakin
An estate of 1 hectare of land adjoining the road of Calah, the side road of Calah, and the side road of the village of Zizî;
Afterwards, Teumman, the (very) image of a gallû-demon, sat on the throne of Urtaku. He constantly sought out evil (ways) to kill the children of Urtaku (and) the children of Ummanaldašu (Ḫumban-ḫaltaš II), the brother of Urtaku. Ummanigaš, Ummanappa, (and) Tammarītu — the sons of Urtaku, the king of the land Elam — Kudurru (and) Parrû — (iv 35) (s
Witness Dusî.
Bel-Harran-ilu,
4 sheep ...
... their ... s, their shepherds
The son of Yakin has been killed. The son of NN has been killed. The son of NN has been killed. The son of NN has been killed. The son of NN has been killed. The son of NN has been killed. The son of NN has been killed. The son of NN has been killed. The son of NN has been killed. The son of NN has been killed. The son of NN has been killed. The son of NN has been killed. The son of NN has been killed. The son of NN has been killed. The
I have sent my messenger to Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II) regarding these matters.
On my third campaign, I marched to the land Ḫatti. Fear of my lordly brilliance overwhelmed Lulî, the king of the city Sidon, and he fled afar into the midst of the sea. The awesome terror of the weapon of the god Aššur, my lord, overwhelmed the cities Great Sidon, Lesser Sidon, Bīt-Zitti, Ṣarepta, Maḫalliba, Ušû, Akzibu, (and) Acco, his fortified cities (and) fortresses, an area of pasture
Witness NN, ša šepi guard.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
If there is a planet in the sky: the king of Elam will die, and his country will revolt against him.
I have now written to you: be attentive!
Witness Aššur-aplu-uṣur, baker.
... &  beer ...
In the future, may one of the kings, my descendants, whom the god Aššur and the goddess Ištar nominate for ruling over the land and people, renovate its dilapidated section(s) when that temple becomes dilapidated and old. (viii 10') May he find an inscribed object bearing my name, and (then) anoint (it) with oil, make an offering, (and) place (it) with an inscribed object bearing his name. The god Aššur and the goddess Ištar will (then) hear
The 26th day: favorable.
30 ...
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhe, conscript.
... s, their ... s, their ... s,
At that time, the wall of the bakehouse which the kings, my ancestors, had previously built — that wall had become dilapidated and I removed its debris. I rebuilt (it) from top to bottom. I deposited my monumental inscription.
Witness Šumma-le'i.
5 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish, belonging to Nabû-ahu-iddina, at the disposal of Nabû-šumu-uṣur, son of Nabû-šumu-iddina, and Nabû-šumu-iddina, the brother of Nabû-šumu-iddina.
total, 4 ... of the goddess Ištar.
Mannu-ki-Aššur,
6 bags of (mixed) kernels.
Nabû-apil-kumu'a,
— It is seen in the middle of the sky.
Nabû-ušabši ...
Total 5 horses — Zabinu.
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Now, if it is acceptable to the king, my lord, let the king, my lord, command that they should be shown a house in Nineveh and live there, and let me send my servants to the king, my lord, to do obeisance to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, command that they should be shown a house in Nippur and live there, and let my servants do obeisance to the king, my lord.
(As for) the rest of the Arabs who had fled from my weapons, I pursued them to the land of the Nabayateans. I massacred 300 of their men. I carried off their property, their possessions, their gods, their wives, their sons, their daughters, their camels, their she-camels, their donkeys, their oxen, and their sheep and goats. I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire their cities. I turned (them) into a mound of ruins (lit. “a mound and ru
Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria: (As for) Sarduri of the land Urarṭu, who had brought about the ruination of the land through the wrath of the god Marduk, a son of his, his own offspring, cut him down with the sword. (ii 10) (As for) Išpabāra of the land Bīt-Yakīn, who had brought about the ruination of the land through the wrath of the god Marduk, his own offspring cut him down with the sword
Total, 300+x ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Kiṣir-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord!
Ashur-ilai,
... the town of ...
... the city
... to them ...
Egašankalamma, “House of the great mountain”: the house of the Lord of Babylon.
For the goddess Ištar of Uruk, lady of the lands: Ashurbanipal, king of the four quarters (of the world), son of Esarhaddon, king of the four quarters (of the world), governor of Babylon, (and) king of the four quarters (of the world), son of Sennacherib, king of the four quarters (of the world), descendant of Sargon (II), king of the four quarters (of the world), renovated Eanna (“House of Heaven”), the temple of highest rank, for the sake of his life
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Send Aššur-ila'i to me!" — I have sent him to the king, my lord; let the king, my lord, question him.
... the chariot of the goddess Ištar
Now, if you say: "I will not give up the land of the Urarṭians," then do not give up the land of the Urarṭians, but keep it in your hands, and let me do the work of the king, my lord, and deliver it to the king, my lord.
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria; the one who fashioned image(s) of the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Adad, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Ištar of Ar
1 woman from ...
... they came
I have given out the barley of the servants of the king, my lord, who are in the town of Uqimutaya. The barley of the king, my lord, is in the town of Uqimutaya. The ... of the king, my lord, is in the town of Uqimutaya.
with ...
Month of Šabāṭu (XI), 20th day, eponym year of Dadî-iqbi.
When I heard this, I wrote to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should ask the scribe of the palace. If he says: "It is good," let the king, my lord, do as he deems best. If not, let the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
... the goddess Ištar of Uruk, the great lady, my lady, ... the goddess Ištar of Arbela, the great lady, my lady, ... the goddess Ištar of the Kidmuri Temple, the great lady, my lady, ... the goddess Ištar of the Nineveh, the great lady, my lady, ... the goddess Ištar of the Hargaean Temple, the great lady, my lady, ... the goddess Ištar of the Hargaean Temple, the great lady, my lady, ... the goddess I
The one who crushed the Barnaki, a dangerous enemy, who live in the city Tīl-Ašurri, which is called Pitānu in the language of the people of the land Miḫrānu; the one who scattered the Mannean people, undisciplined Gutians — (as for) the land Patušarri, a district in the area of the salt desert, which is in the midst of the land of the distant Medes, borders Mount Bikni, (and) upon the soil of whose land none of the kings, my ancestors, had walked,
The land of the king is well; the forts are well. The king, my lord, can be glad.
at the disposal of Ubru-... , ...
Šumâ has contracted and bought them from Mannu-ki-Adad for 2 minas of silver by the mina of the king.
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
Witness Bel-naṣir.
1 bag of sesame; 1 bag of chick-peas; 1 bag of lentils;
The king, my lord, can be glad.
2 ... the chief ...
... , ... th day, eponym year of ... ,
... the land of the Šubaru, the land of the Qedarites, the land of the Nairi, the land of the Uqumanu, the land of the Ḫabḫu, the land of the Ḫamrānu, the land of the Luḫuʾatu, the land of the Ḫaṭallu, the land of the Ḫaṭallu, the land of the Ḫaṭallu, the land of the Ḫaṭallu, the land of the �
Nabû-uṣalla, the ... of the Urarṭian, has written to me: "The ... of the Urarṭian has been brought to me. I have given it to the ... of the Urarṭian. The messenger of the Urarṭian has come to me, saying: 'The king of Assyria has written to the king of the Urarṭian: 'Come to me, let us divide the land between us.'"
If a fog rolls in on a cloudy day: fall of Elam.
The god Aššur, the great lord, gave me (the power) to make (cities) fall into ruins and to (re)populate (them, and) to enlarge Assyrian territory; the god Sîn, lord of the crown, gave me the power to make (cities) fall into ruins and to (re)populate (them, and) to enlarge Assyrian territory; the god Šamaš, the light of the gods, gave me the power to make (cities) fall into ruins and to (re)populate (
The palace of Aššur-nārārī, king of the universe, son of Išme-Dagan (II), king of Assyria.
1 litre of ... for the king, my lord.
of the palace of ...
... I had a stele made, and I wrote on it all the mighty victories that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, and (then) I placed (it) in the wall of the city ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
when the son of ...
I took the city Elenzaš as a royal city and a fortress for that district, then I changed its former name and called it Kār-Sennacherib. I settled therein the people of the lands that I had conquered.
1,000 (homers) of barley belonging to Remanni-Adad, at the disposal of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, horse trainer of the king.
a halo of ...
I was afraid (and) worried to perform that work (and) I knelt before the gods Šamaš, Adad, and Marduk, the great judge(s), the gods, my lords. In the diviner’s bowl, trustworthy oracles were established for me, and they had (their response) concerning the (re)building of Babylon (and) the renovation of Esagil written on a liver.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
... of the right
Month Iyyar (II), 10th day, eponym year of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, chief eunuch of the king.
Witness Mutakkil-Marduk, scribe.
... Witness Nabû-šumu-uṣur.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why has the son of Yakin not come to me?"
to ...
the words of his brother in ...
... and gave to Šulmu-beli-lamur,
Witness Šumaya, son of Abaya.
and when he came,
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, and whom Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, has taken into his entourage, will make an insurrection and rebellion against Esarhaddon, king of Assyria,
1/2 mina 1/2 shekels of silver, 1/3 mina 1/4 shekels of silver, 1/4 mina 1/2 shekels of silver, 1/3 mina 1/4 shekels of silver, 1/4 mina 1/2 shekels of silver, 1/4 mina 1/2 shekels of silver, 1/4 mina 1/2 shekels of silver, 1/4 mina 1/2 shekels of silver,
... the forts ...
... the king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the king, my lord, and that I have ... ed the king, my lord's servants.
We have ... ed the land of ... and given it to NN, the ... of the land of ...
... huzūnu-garments, red, of the port;
If the sun at its rising wears a crown: the harvest of the land will prosper; the king will reach the highest rank.
... Abi-ul-idi, his people,
The god Aššur, king of the gods, ... his ... and his offspring.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
Witness Šamaš-ila'i, royal bodyguard.
... to the son of Abu-eriba
10 minas of silver, 10 minas of gold, 10 minas of lapis lazuli, 10 minas of alabaster, 10 minas of basalt, 10 minas of pendû-stone, 10 minas of elallu-stone, 10 minas of ghee, 10 minas of oil, 10 minas of honey, 10 minas of ghee, 10 minas of wax, 10 minas of cedar resin,
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed. The judge shall not heed his case.
... Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur.
... to the guard
If the moon and sun are in balance: reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king will make his throne last long.
Witness Nabû-šumu-iškun.
... to ...
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... 8 vineyards in the town of Zabinu;
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, ditto.
... from the land of Akkad
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
The money is paid completely. That ... is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
the son ...
... As to what you wrote: "I have sent ... to the king, my lord" —
... is not ... ; they are not ... and they are not ... !
... of the heart ...
The city of the king, Nineveh.
... Nabû-nadin-ahhe, son of Nabû-nadin-ahhe,
Will the messenger of Šamaš-šumu-ukin, who is in the presence of the king of Elam, and who is going to the presence of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, and (whom) your great divinity knows, escape from the troops of the Medes, from the troops of the Manneans, from the troops of the Scythians, and from the troops of the Cimmerians?
On the 6th day, when the king, my lord, was staying overnight in the palace, I sent my messenger to Šamaš-šumu-ukin with the following message: "Come and stay with me!" He did not agree to come, but said: "I will come and stay with you on the 10th." I wrote to the king, my lord: "He has not agreed to come, but will come on the 10th." The king, my lord, wrote me back: "I will not agree to that, but will send him to you on the
Zeru-ukin, son of Nabû-na'id;
The people of the land of the Manneans, the people of the land of the Medes, the people of the land of the ... , the people of the land of the ... , the people of the land of the ... , the people of the land of the ... , the people of the land of the ... , the people of the land of the ... , the people of the land of the ... , the people of the land of the ... , the people of the land of the ... , the people of the land of the ... , the people of the land of the ... , the people of the land of the ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šarru-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
... I did not give
... and the rest of the Urarṭians ... who are in the district of ... , they have been brought to me. I have sent them to the king, my lord.
I have now written to the Palace. May the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
does not ...
Month of the land of the people, ... th day, eponymy of ...
I have written ...
Five days ago, Nabû-naṣir, the son of the king, my lord, came to me, saying: "Come with me to the Inner City, so I can speak with the king, my lord."
... who in the time of the king, my lord, ... ed the land of the king, my lord, ... ed the land of the king, my lord, ... ed the land of the king, my lord, ...
... 4 persons
a ditto of quinces;
... The money is paid completely. That garden is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... of his own
3 sons of Nabû-zeru-ka''in.
Mars is the star of the Westland; evil for the Westland and Elam. Saturn is the star of Akkad. It is good for the king my lord; evil for the Westland and Elam.
we have not seen ...
6 (cuts of) meat, the palace;
So that the construction of my palace might be carried out correctly and that my handiwork be completed, at that time, the god Aššur and the goddess Ištar, who love my priestly service (and) who selected me (lit. “who called my name”), revealed to me a source of trunks of cedar, which since distant days grew tall and very thickly grew on Mount Amanus, which is in the mountains.
The 'station' is present. The 'path' is curled on the right and on the left...
If there is an eclipse in Sivan (III) at an unappointed time, and Jupiter stands in the place where the sun shines forth, and the south wind blows: fall of Elam. Its people will be confused with each other, and their king will die, and his son will seize the throne, and he will lead the people of his land in a hostile manner against the Assyrians, and ... the people of the land ...
If a planet becomes visible in the path of the sun: the king of Akkad will die, and there will be hostility in the land.
... Witness ...
... of 5 ...
Now then I have sent my messenger to the Palace. Let my lord quickly send me a reply to what I have written to my lord.
... has been brought to me ...
I have sent my messenger to the king, my lord; let the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
These are the ones placed under the protection of Aššur:
... the town of Balaṭ
40 sheep,
I brought Dunānu, a son of a nobody, a person of lowly status, a coward (lit. “who has no knees”), a coward (lit. “who has no backbone”), a coward (lit. “who has no stomach”), a coward (lit. “who has no liver”), a coward (lit. “who has no kidneys”), a coward (lit. “who has no heart”), a coward (lit. “who has no lungs”), a coward (lit. “who has no eyes”), a coward
let him come ...
5 hectares of land, 5 vineyards, in the town of Zabinu —
adjoining the house of Abi-... ,
In the time of your father, in the reign of your grandfather, the king, my lord, was the lord of kings.
... in the hands of Aššur-aplu-...
Indabibi, who sat on the throne of the land Elam after Tammarītu, saw the might of my weapons that had previously prevailed over the land Elam and (viii 10') mustered his troops before me to wage war and strife. With the support of the god Aššur, my lord, I brought about the defeat of his troops in a widespread pitched battle. I captured alive Adinu, a nephew of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), together with his troops. (viii
11 minas of silver, capital, belonging to Nabû-eriba, at the disposal of Nabû-eriba, his son.
He shall pay in Iyyar (II). If he does not pay, it shall increase by a fourth.
The great gods in their assembly determined a favorable destiny as my lot and
1 duck. A 2-seah jar of beer;
To the king, my lord: your servant Nashir-Bel. Good health to the king, my lord!
... , NN, Nabû-iqiša,
Nabû-šumu-lišir,
6 shekels, Nabû-šumu-... ;
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the 10th day of this month, Iyyar (II), of this year, to the 9th day of Sivan (III) of this year, for 30 days and nights, the term stipulated for the performance of (this) extispicy — within this stipulated term,
... of the palace scribe
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), leader of a widespread population, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, the one who carries out to perfection the rites of Ešarra and Ezida, the one who builds the shrines of the steppe and the mountains, the one who makes sattukku-offering(s) abundant, the one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, the one who provides
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Eltekeh (and) Tamnâ. I approached the city Ekron and I killed the governors (and) nobles who had committed crime(s) and hung their corpses on towers around the city;
1/3 mina ... of the queen mother;
Nabû-eriba, palace scribe of the queen.
The son of Yakin has written to me: "Come and stay with me!"
The palace of Aššur-nārārī, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Išme-Dagan (II), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Išme-Dagan (II), (who was) also vice-regent of the god Aššur: (10) I built anew the temple of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, which is in the city Arbela, for my life, the prolongation of my days, the securing of my reign, the
The chariot which is hitched to the chariot which is in the palace is the king's chariot.
300 Itu'eans,
If a fog rolls in the month of Nisan (I): the harvest of the land will prosper.
(Property) of Aššur-nādin-šumi, king of the world, king of Assyria.
... Nabû-eṭir-napšati, the bodyguard ...
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Give back the men!" —
... the 'path' is present...
to ...
the king, my lord, ...
To the 'farmer,' our lord: your servants Adad-šumu-uṣur and Urad-Ea. Good health to the 'farmer,' our lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the 'farmer,' our lord!
before ...
From Ašaredu.
Witness Abi-sagab.
The king, my lord, knows that I am a dog of the house of my lord. I have no field, no house, no servant, no maid, no cook, no gardener, no farmer, no shepherd, no orchard, no well, no house, no maid, no servant, no cook, no gardener, no orchard, no well, no house, no maid, no servant, no farmer, no orchard, no well, no house, no maid, no servant, no orchard, no well, no house, no maid, no servant, no or
May a later prince restore my inscribed name to its place. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
of the king ...
In the future, may one of the sons, grandsons, (great grand)sons, or (great, great grand)sons, one of the kings, my descendants, whom the god Marduk and the goddess Zarpanītu choose and nominate for ruling over the land and people, renovate its dilapidated section(s) when that temple becomes dilapidated and old.
... the scribe of ...
Witness Il-aplu-iddina.
... the 'path' is present...
... of the servants ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
I had a stele made, and had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, written on it. I had (this stele) placed before the god Aššur, my lord, and (then) I had all the enemies whom I had defeated with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, also written on it and placed before the god Aššur, my lord.
... Il-yada' ...
... of the king, his brother
He shall pay in the month of Tishri (VII). If he does not pay, it shall increase by a fourth.
... their ...
In the future may a later prince, when that wall becomes dilapidated and he renovates (it), anoint my monumental inscriptions with oil, ...
Total x persons, servants of these men —
NN and his people,
came ...
Sphinxes of alabaster and cast urudû-copper with inlays of shining silver, sphinxes of cast ... -metal, as well as twelve raging bronze lions: I erected over them magnificent copper columns (and) large cedar columns, as well as columns of ebony, cypress, daprānu-juniper, (and) terebinth, with pašallu-gold, silver, and copper inlays, and (then) I positioned cross-beams (upon them) as a cornice for their
... to Na'id-...
... with the son of Yakin
Performed by Nabû-šallimanni.
... of the bed ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Send the Itu'eans here!" —
As to the work on the ziggurat of the bakers, I have brought out the bricks and deposited them in the courtyard of the palace. I have also brought out the bricks of the ziggurat of the brewers and deposited them in the courtyard of the palace. I have brought out the bricks of the ziggurat of the confectioners and deposited them in the courtyard of the palace.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ahhe-šallim. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Afterwards, Teumman, the (very) image of a gallû-demon, sat on the throne of Urtaku. He constantly sought out evil (ways) to kill the children of Urtaku (and) the children of Ummanaldašu (Ḫumban-ḫaltaš II), the brother of Urtaku. Ummanigaš, Ummanappa, (and) Tammarītu — the sons of Urtaku, the king of the land Elam — Kudurru (and) Parrû — (iv 15) (the
To the king, our lord: your servants Nabû-ašared and Nabû-šuma-lišir. Good health to the king, our lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, our lord!
