I sent to you my warrior, the mighty god Marduk. He went and defeated your enemies. As soon as he had avenged you, he came and kissed my feet.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
11 Kushite horses from the personal guard of ... ;
5 minas, 3 shekels, 1/4 mina: the woman Uarbis;
... the 'station' ...
Why ...
... the base of the middle 'finger' of the lung is 'loose.'
... Now then ...
in all an estate of 10 hectares ...
(As to) the mule express that the king, my lord, has  established for the use of the Inner City, the appointed time for the  arrival of the mule express has arrived. Let the express come.
Witness Ibbutu, chariot driver.
The great god Marduk, the Enlil of the gods, the lord of everything, looked steadfastly upon me among all of the rulers and he made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises. He gave me a just scepter that widens the land (and) he put in my hand a merciless rod to fell enemies.
2 ... pots ... ;
Witness Urdu-Nabû, scribe.
... The 'strength' is present. The 'well-being' is present. The 'path' on the left of the gall bladder is present. The 'weapon'-mark of the 'increment' rises towards the left. The upper part is elevated... The base of the middle 'finger' of the lung is 'loose.'
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
I have sent ... to the palace. The king, my lord, may act as  it (best) suits the king, my lord.
... Qanâ, the ...
1, commandants of the ditto;
Nergal, Laṣ, Išum, Adad, Šala, Taramuwa, Nusku, Mandanu, Nergal of the city Tarbiṣu, Nusku, the Judge of the Gods, Šala:
4 horses — Aššur-ila'i, the treasurer.
Fifty minas (of silver) are in the possession of the scribe of the crown prince, at the disposal of Zabinu, his servant.
Month Adar (XII), 20th day, eponym year of Bel-iqbi, governor of Tušhan.
... -šumu-iškun ...
Ahu-nuri ... ;
... the return of ...
... -ibni, his wife, ... , 1 son, 1 daughter, 3 servants of his ... :
(As for) the Assyrian wall which had been built with baked bricks (colored with) lapis lazuli, a stone from the mountains, and which had become dilapidated and old, I removed its dilapidated section(s) with the help of the gods Sîn (and) Nusku.
Nabû of the hariu-vat (and) Nergal of the hariu-vat.
... of the gate of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh.
When the god Šamaš, the great judge of the gods, who provides justice for all living beings, entrusted to me the lordship of the land of Akkad, I put on the jewellery of the goddess Ištar, my lady, (and) held in my hand the weapon of the goddess Ištar, the lady of battle. I went up to the steppe to the city Ḫalulê (Ḫalulê), the abode of the goddess Ištar, (and) offered pure sacrifices to the goddess Ištar,
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether ... or his sons or his grandsons, or the ... of his palace, or ... ,
Witness Mannu-ki-Ninua, scribe.
... the god Nergal, who loves my priesthood, gave to me the wild beasts and commanded me to hunt. I killed 30 elephants from an ambush pit. I slew 240 strong lions. I killed 370 wild bulls from my ... chariot with my lordly assault with the spear. I killed 120 ostriches like caged birds. I drove 200 stags with my horns.
... the king overthrew your royal dynasty.
If Jupiter becomes visible in the mišhu of Sagittarius: the king of the land will die.
... Iau-ašared.
... , 1 spray of apples;
10 shekels of silver, capital belonging to Aššur-nadin-apli, at the disposal of Qurdi-Adad.
Witness Sa'ilu, porter.
... of the land Ḫalaḫḫu ... I/they received ... of his/its ... (5') ... of his/its ... I/they carried off ... his/its ... without number... his/its ... (10') ... his/its ... before/with ... of the land Ḫalaḫḫu ... of the land Ḫalaḫḫu ... of the land Ḫalaḫḫu ... of the land Ḫalaḫḫu ... of the land Ḫalaḫḫu ... of the land ��
Aššur, bless him! Šamaš, ...
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
The king, my lord, knows that the Assyrians hold a grudge against the house of Aššur-zeru-ibni. They have seized upon him all the opportunities for making mischief, and he has suffered many unpleasant things because of it. The king should know (this) and should not say: "Why did Aššur-zeru-ibni not come before me?"
horses ...
(As for) Gyges, the king of the land Lydia — a region on the opposite shore of the sea, a remote place, the mention of whose name none of the kings, my ancestors, had (ever) heard — (the god) Aššur, (the god) who created me, made him see in a dream my royal name. On the (very) day he saw this dream, he sent his mounted messenger to inquire about my well-being.
Rīmūt-ilī, his wife, three sons of his, two daughters of his, ... , 1 horse, 1 mule, 10 donkeys, 1 ox, 10 sheep, in all 16 people of Rīmūt-ilī ... in the town of Ḫašanu —
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Witness Šarru-emuranni.
The boats of the people of Nabû-hamatua and Mukin-zeri arrived on the 1st of Tebet (X); the boat of Nabû-hamatua arrived first, that of Mukin-zeri followed behind.
The money is paid completely.
Concerning the houses of the canal inspector ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Give (them) to NN!" —
Why does Nabû-ahhe-šallim keep attacking my servants? He is a friend of mine, but (nevertheless) he keeps attacking my servants. I have now written to the king, my lord; may the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
Zabdî, the ... , says: "Aššur-balti-niši ... has given me a bribe from the house of Aššur-naṣir. He said: 'Give him a present and ... to his face! ... from the house of Aššur-naṣir ... , and he will return the favour by giving you a present.'"
If a planet becomes visible in Shebat (XI): the enemy will raid the land of the Westland.
Bel-naṣir, ... ;
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Uarbis or his sons or his brothers or his nephews, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Remanni-Adad, his sons and his grandsons, shall place x minas of refined silver and 10 minas of pure gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh.
A tablet of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, to the eunuch of Šarru-lu-dari, his brother. Good health to my brother!
Month of Tebet (X), 26th day, eponym year of Sagab (651).
the boat of the ...
... and ...
The hand of Riša-...
Ditto by Nikkal of Arbela!
... of the day
total 400, at 1 seah each.
The moon will complete the day on the evening of the beginning of the year: it is favorable for the king my lord.
... and the dead one
The king should give orders to ... that they should ... in his presence.
Ubru-apli, ditto, ... ;
All of the kingdom bless the king, my lord.
... servant of NN
If a planet comes close to a crescent: the king will take the throne of his enemy's land.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Aplaya or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Urdu-Nabû,
Aššur, Mullissu, the Lady of Arbela, the Lady of the Mountain, the Seven Gods (and) the Narudi, Ea-šarru (and) Damkina, Usumû ...
My father saw me and rejoiced greatly. During joyous celebrations, he kissed my feet. I made him rise from his seat and, (then) I made him kiss the ground before the god ... I embraced him (and) lifted him on my knee. I put the necklace of the god Nergal around his neck ...
... your father, who was killed ...
... the image
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Concerning the potion ...
Witness Nabû-...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Riṣiṣu or his sons or his brothers or his nephews or his prefect or the mayor of his city or any relative of his, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Aplaya and his sons,
is splitting ...
If the earth quakes in Tammuz (IV): the cemetery of warriors will expand.
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord!
News of the son of Yakin: he is in ...
... the king, my lord ...
If on the 15th day the moon and sun are seen together: a strong enemy will raise his weapons against the land; the enemy will tear down my city gate.
Witness Se'-dalâ.
The house of my lord can be glad indeed. The king will rule the country  where his men are placed, and his men will increase in number.
Now, may the king, my lord, send a royal bodyguard to these people so they will come and get their gods. May the king, my lord, write to me, (so) I can give the gods back to their owners. I have written to the king, my lord, (about this) several times, but I have not heard an answer.
a wooden ...
Witness Aplu-uṣur, ...
who ... the well-being of ...
Just as gall is bitter, so may you, your women, your sons and your daughters be bitter towards each other.
(Property) of Atalia, queen of Sargon (II), king of Assyria.
They are of their own accord.
Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, true shepherd, favorite of the lord of lords, pious prince, beloved of the goddess Zarpanītu — the queen, the goddess of the entire universe — reverent king who from the days of his childhood was attentive to their rule and praised their valor, pious slave, humble, submissive, the one who reveres their great divinity — Aššur, the goddess
Month Tishri (VII), ... th day, eponym year of Aššur-duru-uṣur (652).
Ilu-iqbi,
The heart of the ram is normal...
they rejoice, the king ...
... the defence
... the archers ...
Now, if the king, my lord, orders, ...
thrice I marched to the lands Nairi (and) conquered the extensive lands Nairi from the land Tummu to the land Daiēnu and the land Uraṭru. I brought about the defeat of the extensive army of the Papḫu in battle (and) took away their camp.
... Aššur-mukin-paleya
The messenger of the king of Elam who came to us said: "... of the Elamite ... is coming to the city of Aššur."
I had a stele made and had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, written on it. I erected it on the plain of the city Ḫalulê.
... in the palace
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 6th day, eponym year of Bel-lu-dari, governor of Kurbail.
The Tebilti River, a tempestuous flood (of water) which had flowed from distant days by the side of the palace and which had caused erosion in its foundation when its flood was in full spate (and) had shaken its base:
Witness Nabû-dur-beliya.
scribe of the enemy.
You sing, “O Lord, you are magnificent.”
... the vizier, my lord, ...
(As for) the one who destroys an inscribed object bearing my name, (the name of) my father, (and the name of) my grandfather, (or) does not place (it) with an inscribed object of his (own), may the gods Sîn, Šamaš, Adad, and Ištar, the great gods, my lords, curse him and make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the land. May they overthrow his kingship, curse his reign, (and) make him live in bondage under his enemy.
of my house ...
The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
May the king, my lord, do as he deems best. If it pleases the king, my lord, let the chief victualler give orders to the effect that a certain storehouse in Nineveh is to be handed over to the domestics of the palace, and let them bring (it) to me. I will then bring (it) to the king, and the king will be able to draw water by bucket every day.
... they have bound him
There is a 'weapon'-mark over the 'increment.' The 'increment' is normal. The 'base of the throne' is present.
I killed ten strong bull elephants in the land Ḫarrān and the region of the River Ḫabur (and) four live elephants I captured. I brought the hides and tusks (of the dead elephants) with the live elephants to my city Aššur. I took pictures of the live elephants and the hides and tusks of the dead elephants and hung (them) around the neck of the goddess Ištar, my mistress. I went to the land Ḫabur (
Witness Tabalayu.
The money is paid completely. Those men are purchased and acquired.
NN, gate-guard;
The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number. The heart of the ram is normal.
Concerning the ... about which Aššur-... wrote to me, I have sent the ... s to the king, my lord; they will arrive ...
Mannu-ki-Ashur, his mother, his brother,
... Witness Bel-hussanni.
(As for) the people of the land Akkad who had not escaped my weapons, they saw the dust cloud (stirred up) by the feet of my troops, and terror fell upon them. They opened the treasury of the god Šamaš and brought out gold, silver, (and) choice stones from inside it. They sent (them) as a bribe to Indabibi, (my) son of the brother of the king of the land Elam, (saying): “Indabibi, accept the bribe from them and align yourself with us! Let us put our
Witness Mannu-...
The ... of Aššur-mukin-paleya, which is in ... , is placed as a pledge in the ... of Aššur-matu-taqqin.
To the king, my lord: your servant, Nabû-šumu-iddina. Good  health to the king, my lord. May Nabû and Marduk very greatly bless the king, my lord. May Aššur, Sin, Šamaš, Bel, Nabû, Nergal, Ištar of Nineveh and Ištar of Arbela call vigour, health, happiness, physical well-being and lasting days for the king, my lord.
Afterwards, Uallî, his son, sat on his throne. He saw the might of the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Adad, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Šarrat-Kidmuri, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Nergal, (and) Nusku, the great gods, my lords, and bowed down to my yoke. For the preservation of his (own) life, he opened up his hands to me (and
A thigh, a shoulder, outer cuts,
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 9th day, eponym year of La-baši, chief of trade ...
2 basins for washing hands, of bronze;
(As for) the Cimmerians, a dangerous enemy who had never feared my ancestors, and, with regard to me, had not grasped the feet of my royal majesty, (ii 10') with the support of the gods Aššur, Bēl (Marduk), and Nabû, the great gods, my lords, he (Gyges) clamped (them) in manacles, handcuffs, (and) neck-stocks and sent (them) before me, together with his substantial audience gift(s). I constantly saw the might of the
(But) as for the one who erases my inscribed name or the name of the king, my lord, by some crafty device, ...
We are dead dogs. We have spoken to the merchants, but they have not agreed to sell to us.
If the king, my lord, orders, I will ... to the king, my lord.
seal of NN, ... ,
I had a canopy, which rivals the heavens, made from musukkannu-wood, a durable wood. I clad its perimeter with thirty-four talents (and) twenty minas of reddish gold and (thereby) reinforced its bonds. I stretched out its covering over the god Marduk, the great lord, and (thus) secured its roof.
Nabû-šarru-uṣur, of the town of Kamanu;
... of the temple ...
their sons ...
8 homers of sesame oil.
I was afraid of death and did not approach the king, my lord. Now I have approached  the king, my lord. What is it that the king, my lord, commands?
... minas of silver
... to the city of Akkad
Witness NN.
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), offspring of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, descendant of Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria —
As to the news of the king of Elam, the brother of Umman-pada has come and said to me:
... these ...
The king, my lord, should give orders to the effect that they are to keep watch over the steles and the royal statue, and to remove them from the danger zone (of possible) flooding by day and by night.
If at the moon's appearance one horn meets the other: the flood will come. – The horns meet in Shebat (XI).
(As for) the citizens of (the cities) Sippar, Nippur, Babylon, and Borsippa who through no fault of their own had been held captive in them (the fifteen cities), I put an end to their imprisonment and let them see the light (of day). (With regard to) their fields, which long ago, while the land was in disorder, the Sutians had taken away and appropriated for their own, I struck down (those) Sutians, the people of the steppe, with the sword. I (re)assigned to them (
(If) a snake keeps scaring (people) in a temple: the offerings of that temple will continue for a long time.
... the disposition
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord!
... the goddesses Ištar of Nineveh (and) Ištar of Arbela
... of the goddess Ištar
Witness Kannunayu.
26 (items): silver kappu-bowls belonging to the queen, whose mountings are of gold;
I had an inscribed object made and had all the mighty victories that I achieved over all of (my) enemies with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, (vi 10) written on it. With inscribed objects of earlier rulers, my ancestors, I deposited (it) for ever after in the wall of Nineveh, my capital city, for the kings, my descendants. The god Aššur, the great lord, my lord, (vi 15) commanded that the wall should be built and I built (it) from top to bottom.
(As for) Ummanaldašu (Ḫumban-ḫaltaš III), the king of the land Elam, for whom I performed many act(s) of kindness (and) whom I installed as king of the land Elam, (and) who forgot my favor(s), did not honor the treaty sworn by the great gods, (and) accepted bribe(s) from the hands of the messengers of Šamaš-šuma-ukīn — (my) unfaithful brother, my enemy — he sent his forces with them to fight with
Witness Marduk-šarru-uṣur, cohort commander.
1 house, 2 gardens ... ;
2 tureens of bouillon;
adjoining the town of Sahiru,
If Adad thunders ...
3 ... s of Huziru, of 1 seah each;
Month ... , 19th day, eponym year of Marduk-šarru-uṣur.
Ashur-bani, ... ; Abi-rahî, chariot driver;
Ashur-taklak.
The lion is his larger intestines. The dog is his smaller intestines.
At that time, I made the enemy people whom I had captured carry baskets (of earth)
... of the gate
The base of the middle 'finger' of the lung is 'bound.'
The king has made my life wonderful, provided for my needs and granted me a good name. The king will make the enemies of his servant disappear, just as he has ...
10 ... ;
What is it that the king, my lord, orders?
Nabû-šumu-iddina ...
... me the Gambuleans ...
The king's word to the commander-in-chief:
The king came out. He strewed salt on the tables in the qirsu-enclosure of the god.
May the king, my lord, send (word) to Ibbutu that they should bring the gods to us so that we can put them in place in the temple of your gods.
Witness Nabû'a.
Witness Šep-...
Witness NN. Witness Aya-yababa.
adjoining a street,
... -iddin, ditto;
1, of the chief of trade;
Adad-le'i, prefect;
there ...
Witness ... -ili, ...
Neriglissar, pious prince, beloved of the god Nabû, who reveres the goddess Ištar, the pious slave who reveres the great gods, am I:
I built (and) completed that palace from its foundations to its battlements.
Concerning the king's subjects who are in Kar-Tukulti-Ninurta, about whom the king my lord wrote to me: "Let them be brought here!" — as soon as the ... s of the Palace Superintendent arrive, I shall bring them ...
tribute of the man of GN.
Because I respect the treaty of the king, my lord, ... I did not go ... until ... upon the eunuch ...
at the disposal of Bel-... ṣalli,
... the son of Abu-eriba
In the midst of that battle, I captured alive the Egyptian charioteers and princes (lit. “the sons of the king”), together with the charioteers of the king of the land Meluḫḫa. (viii 35) The latter, seeing the decapitated heads of their king’s brothers, madness took hold of them. They pulled out their (own) beards (and) tore out their own lips. They fought with each other for kingship of Egypt, (but) none of them (could claim) kingship. They fled to the city The
(As for) Nabû-šuma-ēreš, the šandabakku (governor of Nippur) who did not honor (my) treaty, he suffered from dropsy, (that is) “full water.”
... of Inurta-...
100 ... horses,
... Bel-eṭir, the king's eunuch, the chief of the quays of ... , a servant of NN, a ... of Aššur-belu-uṣur, the ... of ...
Witness Marduk-šakin-šumi, royal bodyguard.
We are bearing (it), we have not let it go outside. May the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
The charge of the rear palace is well. During the days of the king, my lord, I used to give (him) food and fodder, (and) he used to give (them) to the king's servants.
A man from among them, whose name is written in this papyrus, and placed before your great divinity ...
... very
I will come and ...
is it acceptable to the king, my lord?
May Nergal (and) Laṣ decree life for you!
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether these men or their  brothers or any relative of theirs, seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Ribate, shall pay 10 minas of silver. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
... Ubrî
11th day.
and his people, ... ,
News of the Urarṭian: ... has entered Waisi on the 12th with the following message: "The Urarṭian has been defeated on the 11th ... ; his commander-in-chief ... has been taken prisoner."
He shall pay in Tishri (VII).
As to what you wrote: "Urpala'a may slip away from the king's hands on account of the fact that the son of Zababa-eriba keeps making raids in Urpala'a and the king, my lord, knows that the city is Slamši's" — Slamši is the son of Yakin, he is one of theirs, he is one of theirs. The cities of the king, my lord, are Slamši's, Sikdê's (and) Qanê's. The king, my
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
At that time, by the command of Aššur, the king of the gods, and the goddess Ištar, the queen, may the good šēdu (and) the good lamassu last forever and ever in that palace. May they never leave it.
to... the king, my lord
Witness ... a, son of Bel-šezib.
— Venus stands in the west.
a cup of olives;
If the wolf star is faint, there will be a scarcity of grain in the land ...
The city Ḫarḫar, which had rebelled (and) sided with the king of the land Elam, I conquered in the eponymy of Ashurbanipal. I carried off ... , together with their possessions, the people of the city Ḫarḫar, as many as there were, (and) the gods dwelling in the city Ḫarḫar, together with their property. I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire that city.
... the throne of Esarhaddon ...
... their ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
1 ... of obsidian, lapis lazuli and carnelian;
A thigh, a shoulder, outer cuts;
The king will say: "A female servant in the household of the palace superintendent —  she should come." I have sent (word), and she is on her way here. May the king, my lord,  send (word) that they should bring her to me.
... are under the king's protection.
Tiglath-pileser, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (I), vice-regent of the god Aššur:
to ...
The king, my lord, should quickly send the amulets to Akkad. Why do they act as if they did not fear the king? The king, my lord, should write to his servant that they should bring the amulets to me.
Witness Saka-kašid.
... the governor of Harran
Those who conspire with them ...
A 2-seah jar of hinhinu-seeds;
... a tent in the house ...
... -le'i
I said: "... will come ...
from 30 women ...
... I gave to him ...
Ashur-belu-usur,
... the king ...
who with us ...
Palace of Shalmaneser, great king, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria: facing slab of the palace courtyard.
... the king, my lord
... a town in the mountains
Concerning the Aramean ...
... the corpse ...
... the front red, of the country;
If Jupiter is bright: the king of Akkad will reach the highest rank; the king of Akkad will have complete dominion; the king of Akkad will become strong and have no rival; the cattle of Akkad will lie in the steppe undisturbed; there will be joy among the people; the king will become happy.
again ...
I have sent ... to the king, my lord; the king may act as he deems best. The king's subjects in Assyria are well.
The king, in the presence of the ...
— On the 14th day the moon is seen together with the sun.
of ... the troops of the king of troops
The king, my lord, can be glad indeed. The god has remembered his servant, and the  god has remembered the city of his servant. In this (very) way, the king, my lord,  can be glad indeed.
I will do the work ...
We have been petitioning the king, our lord, saying: "The locusts have attacked the crops in the village of Aššur-mala'i, and the irrigated field of our lord is also affected."
We are dead dogs. We have spoken to the chief cupbearer ...
I have sent ... to the king, my lord;
May Bel and Nabû let the king, my lord, live forever!
The crown prince of Andia and the crown prince of Babylon did not come into existence in the time of my father; they were created when I was small and weak. Every year they come into my presence with presents and kiss my feet.
Total 1,112 — (province of) the chief of trade.
When the second year arrived, ...
... to greet ...
2 ditto — Inurta-alik-pani
NN ...
Now, concerning the horses of the Suhaean about which you wrote, send them over with the next caravan.
... &  his people,
... Akkad
Seal of NN, owner of the women being sold.
Nabû-eriba, servant of Ša-Nabû-šû —
who directs ...
Witness ... -ili.
The house of Aššur-šallimanni is a fine house; the house of Zeru-ibni is a good house; the house of Abu-eriba is a good house; the house of Nadinu is a good house; the house of Ereš-ilu is a good house; the house of Sîn-ašared is a good house.
... I said to the king, my lord: "... they should not ... to the king, my lord ... "
On the 2nd of Elul (VI) I sent the bodyguard to the  commander-of-fifty of the prefect of Calah.
Witness Nabû-da''inanni, ditto.
Witness Mannu-lu-šulmu
I had a bridge constructed opposite the Citadel Gate (by packing down) paving stones of white limestone for the passage of my lordly chariot. I had the bridge constructed (by packing down) paving stones of white limestone for the passage of my lordly chariot. I had the bridge constructed (by packing down) paving stones of white limestone for the passage of my lordly chariot.
in ...
... of the canal
The palace of Amēl-Marduk, the governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, son of Nebuchadnezzar (II), king of Babylon.
Month of Sivan (III), 4th day, eponym year of Šulmu-beli-lašme.
Aššur-bēl-kala, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-nārārī (II), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-rabi (II), vice-regent of the god Aššur:
... I took the road to the land Ḫatti. Fear of my lordly brilliance overwhelmed Lulî, the king of the city Sidon, and he fled afar into the midst of the sea and disappeared. The awesome terror of the weapon of the god Aššur, my lord, overwhelmed the cities Great Sidon, Lesser Sidon, Bīt-Zitti, Ṣarepta, Maḫalliba, Ušû, Akzibu, (and) Acco, his fortified cities (and) fortresses, an area of pasture(
of the king, my lord, has been sent ...
He shall return the money tenfold to its owner. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed. The judge shall not heed his case.
a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
x vineyards in the town of Uqimutaya, Ṣabu-damqu, gardener, and his people.
The exorcist ...
... field of Arihi, in the town of ...
That which is (written) on a wall in Kār-Tukultī-Ninurta, a palace that is in the city Dēr.
... day
2 'litres' of midru-bread; 2 'litres' of spiced bread.
... the king, my lord, said
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
The king has set out and is on his way, he is staying in the  mountain. The king my lord should know (this).
(Property) of Adad-nārārī, son of Arik-dīn-ili.
On my eighth campaign, I marched against Dunānu, son of Bēl-iqīša, to the land Gambulu, which had put its trust in the king of the land Elam (and) had not bowed down to my yoke. With my mighty battle array, I covered the land Gambulu in its entirety like a fog. I conquered the city Ša-pī-Bēl, his fortified city, whose location is situated between rivers.
The king should know (this) and be happy.
an estate of x hectares of land adjoining the road of ... , adjoining the road of Nabû-... , adjoining Nabû-šumu-iškun,
If the king, my lord, ...
Nabû-ahu-iddina of Bit-...
... s
Witness Issar-šumu-iddina, scribe.
Ditto, may all the gods of the lands that are mentioned by name in this treaty tablet spin you around like a spindle-whorl, may they make you like a woman before your enemy, and may your enemy pull out the foundations of your throne.
The lord of kings, my lord, can be glad indeed. You will defeat the enemy and vanquish the foes of the lord of kings, your lord.
Ditto by Ištar, who dwells in Nineveh! Ditto by Ištar, who dwells in Arbela!
The heart of the sheep is normal.
... is in charge of Bel-šallim.
Witness Gimillu, ...
The charge of the rear palace is well. We are doing (our) work and stay awake (with him) unremittingly, and we pray to the gods. The king, my lord, can be glad.
... bedroom ...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Hattayu or his sons or his brothers or his nephews or his prefect or the mayor of his city or his relative or his neighbour or any relative of his, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Mannu-ki-Adad and his sons and his brothers, shall place ten minas of silver and one mina of gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Witness Na'di-Adad.
The people of (the city) Baltil (Aššur), the people of (the city) Dēr, the people of (the city) Sippar, the people of (the city) Babylon, the people of (the city) Borsippa, the people of (the city) Cutha, the people of (the city) Hursagkalama, the people of (the city) Nippur, the people of (the city) Kish, the people of (the city) Ḫursagkalama, the people of (the city) U
... , ...
a message ... of the son of Yakin ...
... of the temple of ... the temple of ...
Witness Remut-ili.
The priest of Adad wears a golden crown.
... a bowl of wine ...
will they ... ?
The race which they go round in front of Bel and in the streets of Babylon is that of Ninurta.
... of the king of Elam ... -Šamaš, the son of the king of Elam ... (ii' 5') before me ... the goddess Šerua, the lady of the lands, the creation of the hands of (the god) Aššur ... king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, ... to the king, my lord ...
I have given ... to the son of Bel-iqiša, saying: "... the stone ... of the palace."
... his sons
Nabû-shezibanni, ditto;
... to the presence of the king ...
Total, of Ṭab-ahhe, son of Kuzubî.
to ...
Let me praise the wisdom of the god Aššur, my lord, which he had decreed for me. In the beginning, when I was ... , a man who knew the affairs of the palace ... , a merchant, ... , a royal delegate, a nobleman, and a eunuch ...
Urad-Nabû, the son of Bel-eṭir, whom Šamaš-metu-uballiṭ
If an eclipse in the morning watch ... : the king of the world will die, variant: ...
Witness Šar-Issar, ...
1 hand-ring of gold, 1/4 shekel in weight; 1 arm-ring of gold, 1/3 (mina) in weight; 1 neck-piece, 1/3 (mina) in weight; all (pieces) together, 1 1/2 minas in weight.
By the command of the god Marduk, the great lord, the god who created me, I conquered the lands from the Bitter Sea of Bīt-Yakīn, as far as Mount Bikni in the east, up to the Sea of the Setting Sun, as far as Egypt, from the horizon to the zenith.
At that time, the temple of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, which is inside Nineveh, (the temple) which Aššur-dān (I), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Tiglath-pileser (I) (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur, had built, (and) which Sargon (II), (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur, had restored — that temple had again become dilapidated and I, Adad-nārā
owner of the ... being sold.
Witness NN, cohort commander.
In the month Adar (XII), day Nisan (I), eponym year of Sin-šarru-uṣur, governor of Nippur, I moved out from Nineveh (and) entered the city Dūr-Šarrukīn. I offered sacrifices before the god Nabû (and) the goddess Tašmētu. I presented gifts (and) contributed to the shrines.
... outside ...
Concerning the son of Ašipâ about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "I gave him four villages; take away two of them and give them to the son of Ašipâ!" — I took two of his villages and gave them to the son of Ašipâ. Now then I am giving (back) to the son of Ašipâ the two villages which the king, my lord, took away from me. In addition I am giving him the following villages: Laggalagi, Qurani, Qurani again, Uppi, Kullani,
the men of the commander-in-chief have seized ... from the Merchant Town
Does your great divinity know it? Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
1, the domestic quarters of the palace;
... his ...
Review Palace of Nineveh;
... ni,
The coils of the colon are 14 in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
a flagon of beer of bruised grain.
... the Lady of Akkad
Care of the king, the palace superintendent.
... I built (and) completed ... (5') ... of alabaster, ... of alabaster, ... of alabaster, ... of alabaster, ... of alabaster, ... of alabaster, ... of alabaster, ... of alabaster, ... of alabaster, (and) ... of alabaster, (and) I filled (it) with splendor. I made (it) an object of wonder for all of the people... the goddess Ištar, mistress of the lands, ... (10') ... of alabaster, ... of al
... the men who fled
From Ašaredu the younger, servant of the king.
... his ... in his mouth
Witness Adad-šumu-iškun, ...
total, the temple steward.
... to ...
The money is paid completely. That woman is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... 34 ditto ditto ditto, of the country;
He heard their report and ...
Total Aššur-matu-taqqin, village manager.
a total of 180 Kushite horses and 350 cavalry mounts —
... are attacking him
May the king of the gods, the lord of lords, the exalted one, the noble one, the light of the gods, the divine torch,
... they returned, and I appointed him ... over them. Later on ...
... the Hamaraneans
From Issar-šumu-ereš.
... from ...
... s, in all 62, have come in today.
... ;
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nadin-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord! The city of Der and the fort of the king my lord are well.
On my return march, I defeated all together the Tuʾumuna, Riḫiḫu, Yadaqqu, Ubudu, Gibrê, Maliḫu (Malaḫu), Gurumu, Ubulu, Damunu, (15) Gambulu, Ḫindaru, Ruʾuʾa, Puqudu, Ḫamrānu, Ḫagarānu, Nabatu, (and) Liʾtaʾu, insubmissive Arameans.
of the king ...
Witness Adad-naṣir, ...
A tablet of Iqisu to the commander-in-chief.
... the king, my lord
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
Witness Nabû-...
... there is a hole.
The king's word to NN: I am well; you can be glad.
3 bags of sesame;
Witness Isanayu.
... to Merodach-Baladan
NN and his people, ... ,
(As for) the kings of the land Ḫatti (Syria-Palestine), the kings of the land Elam, (and) the kings of the land Mannea who had not bowed down to my yoke, I had (my) victorious chariots and warriors go up onto their (their) royal daises. I had the might of (the god) Aššur, my lord, (ii 55) overwhelm them and I made them bow down to my yoke. I took hostages from them. I imposed upon them (the same state of
... the throne ...
The name of the other one is Ubru-Adad, the ... of ... ; he does not ... the house of ...
... the temple of the goddess Ištar my mistress ... which Sargon (II), king of Assyria, son of Ikūnum, had built, (this temple) had become dilapidated and I rebuilt it from top to bottom. I restored it. I deposited my monumental inscriptions.
A play in three acts, (performed) on the stage of the House of Aššur: Shamšī-ilu, king of Assyria, the hero.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-duru-uṣur. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it? Does your great divinity know it?
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
On my eighth campaign, I marched against Dunānu, son of Bēl-iqīša, to the land Gambulu, which had put its trust in the king of the land Elam (and) had not bowed down to my yoke. With my mighty battle array, I covered the land Gambulu in its entirety like a fog. I conquered the city Ša-pī-Bēl, his fortified city, whose location is situated between rivers.
Witness NN, scribe.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
... is wide ...
The city Adummatu, the abode of the god Atar-samayin, which Sennacherib, king of Assyria, a ruler who came before me, had built, (and) which had become old — (this city) that Sennacherib, king of Assyria, a ruler who came before me, had built, (and) which had become old, (and) which was situated on the border of the land of the Lullumu, between the cities of the land Zamua and the land Ḫašmar — the city Ap
If the moon is covered by a membrane: the land will dwell in quiet. — On the 14th day (the moon) will be seen with the sun.
When in the presence of the king, the crown prince ...
Dayan-Inurta,
And ... the news of the Urarṭian is still the same.
Witness Riba-ahhe.
Month of Ša-sarrāte, eponymy of Nabû-dūrī-uṣur (672 B.C.).
(Property) of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria.
Disregard what happens after my stipulated term...
From Balasî.
... has been done. The ... has been put in place. The ... has been put in place. The ... has been put in place. All is well.
They recite an incantation over it, go outside, and throw it into the river. The ... s of the river will carry it off, and it will be lost to the human being.
They say: "When the Urarṭian came, he captured the son of Ašipâ in his presence ...
May Nabû (and) Marduk bless the king, my lord! May they give to the king, my lord, long days of happiness and physical well-being!
Zer-Issar, son of Ruhu-ahhe, ... ;
... tu, ...
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also king of Assyria: tribute from the land Sūḫu.
... from the pass ...
in all 5 persons, bakers of ... , owners of the woman being sold.
Witness Šumma-Adad. Witness Ahu-nuri.
NN, son of Hiriṣayu, from the town of Ilhini, has contracted and bought (said property) from these gentlemen for x minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
I conquered ten districts of the land of the Mušku which are situated on the other shore of the Lower Zab, (on) the border of the land of the Lullumu, (on) the border of the land of the Papḫu, (and on) the border of the land of the Šubaru, and I annexed (them) to Assyria. I settled in them people of the lands that I had conquered. I set a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over them and I imposed upon them (the same state) service (and) corvée
Palace of Šamšī-Adad, vice-regent of the god Aššur, builder of the temple ...
Witness Šep-Issar, servant of the governor of Til-Barsip.
... has sent ... , saying: "Tell Marduk-šarru-uṣur that ... the son of Merodach-Baladan ... who ... to Nabû-bel-šumati ... Let him be brought here, and let ... question him. Let them bring ... to me."
to the ...
I received gold (and) shining silver sling straps as their wrist-trappings (and) slashed off their belts with sharp swords. I took away gold (and) silver (decorated) belt-daggers as their waist-trappings.
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, chariot driver.
... its foundations are as firm as the heavens.
The coils of the colon are 16 in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
... the ... of the left
The lands Parsuaš, Anzan, Pašeru, (and) Ellipi, the entirety of Chaldea, (and) all of the Arameans, a large host, formed a confederation with him. They met up with the troops of the land Akkad (and) the troops of the land Šubria (and) marched towards me to do battle. (... ) I fought with them (and) brought about their defeat. I drove them away as far as the border of their land(s).
... the 'station' ...
The 'station' is present. The 'path' ... The left of the gall bladder is split ...
a cup of quinces;
10 talents 17 minas of ... ,
— Jupiter stood there one month over its period.
... 1 cloak, the front red, of the port, ... ;
Puzur-Aššur, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-nārārī (I), (who was) also vice-regent of the god Aššur:
... , son of ...
3 ... ;
The bearer of the holy scepter, the circumspect god, the lord of everything, the magnificent one, the heroic one, the one who holds the bond of heaven and underworld, the one who opens springs, the one who walks the wide underworld, the god without whom no decisions are taken in heaven and underworld, the swift, the ferocious, the one whose command is unalterable, the one who gives orders to all the gods, the great lord, his lord:
The 'strength' is present.
I joyfully entered his palace, which is in Babylon, then I opened his treasury and brought out gold, silver, gold (and) silver utensils, precious stones, all kinds of possessions (and) property, a substantial treasure, (together with) his wife, his palace women, courtiers, attendants, all of the craftsmen, as many as there were, (and) his palace attendants, and I counted (them) as booty.
They have been taken out and put aside... the Puqudu
The corps of the king is well.
And after I had prepared for battle the fortress of the land Ḫabḫu, I asked the god Aššur ...
The first is the bull colossus of Duyanusi. It is finished and we have loaded it on a boat. The second is the one of the palace herald. We have not yet loaded it on a boat. The king, my lord, should know (about this).
I shall do the king's work.
Sanda-uarri, a servant of Sanâ son of Pahî, did not kill his master but took his master's property and fled to the land of the Nabayateans. When the king, my lord, sent a bodyguard to Sanâ (with the message): "Send Sanda-uarri to me!", Sanâ did not send Sanda-uarri but took the property and the master's property himself and fled to the land of the Nabayateans. When the king, my lord, sent a bodyguard to Sanâ (with the message): "Send S
From the city Išḫupri to the city Ṣimirra, a distance of fifteen days (journey) on the Euphrates River, (from) the city Ṣimirra to the city Gusinê, a distance of six days (journey) on the Euphrates River, (and from) the city Gusinê to the city Pitiru, a distance of three days (journey) on the Euphrates River, (and from) the city Pitiru to the city Kipšuna, a distance of four days (journey
Witness Hur-waṣi.
My soldiers who were in the city Ṣaṣu ...
... to the king ...
... are running away.
I settled them in the cities Ḫarrua (and) Ḫalḫalauš, which are on the border of the land Elam (and) I placed them under the authority of a eunuch of mine, the governor of the city Ḫarḫar. I had a stele made, had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over them written on it, and I erected (it) in (that) city.
The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
a basket of (mixed) fruit.
Zizî;
... has been seized
An estate of 4 hectares of land adjoining Mannu-ki-Arbail;
from the 21st day of this month ...
... I sent ... to Rusa... and they trampled the people living in those cities (and) made (them) bow down at their feet.
... to ...
... Bit-Yakin
... to ...
If Venus in Ab (V) is bright: the days of the king will be long; there will be truth in the land; the gods will remember Akkad favorably.
of the days ...
NN, the eunuch whom Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, sent to Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the rab mūgi, saying: "Go and settle (them) among the Bīt-Amukāni" — I went and settled them among the Bīt-Amukāni. The king, my lord, knows that they are the king's people, and that they had fled and gone to the land of the Bīt-Amukāni. I brought them out of the land of the B
... , Damascus;
To the king, my lord: your servant Gabbu-ana-Aššur.
Land of the Gurraeans
... the elders of the House of Aššur ...
Witness ... ayu, ditto ditto.
... Aššur-šezibanni
1 seah 1 'litre' of regular offering loaves;
... Aššur-šumu-ka''in is the guarantor of the straw.
Nabû-remanni, his two sons, his wife, a total of 4;
The woman Ezibtu, wife of Biṣî, haruspex.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Month Iyyar (II), 5th day, eponym year of Šulmu-beli.
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
A thigh, a shoulder, outer cuts;
Witness Nabû-zeru-lešir.
To the king, my lord: your servant Mannu-ki-Ninua. Good health to the king, my lord! The land of the king my lord is well.
I settled Assyrians therein. I set up (statues of) my royal majesty in the cities Paddiri, Sikkatu, (and) Akkuddu. I had a stele made and I erected (it) in the city Paddiri. I placed (it) under the authority of a eunuch of mine, the governor of the city Šuru.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, (or) changed or altered the proceedings...
... the Kassites
... what you ...
20 cows of his own;
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: good for Akkad, bad for Elam and the Westland.
... Aššur-dugul ... in his hands ... I placed ... on his throne... I installed Tammarītu, his third brother, as king in Ḫidalu... (5') ... the fear of (the god) Aššur, my lord, overwhelmed him and he ... my ... and he ... my ... with the sword ... the land Elam
Let the king, my lord, send (word) to ... that they should bring ... As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
Afterwards, he should keep watch over them, until I arrive.
When Zeru-ibni went to the meeting of the son of Yakin, the son of Yakin said to Zeru-ibni: "You are an expert in divination? If you wish, take over the leadership of the Qedarites!" Zeru-ibni said: "I am a servant of the king; I will not take over the leadership of the Qedarites."
In the past few days I have been on my way to Dur-Šarruken, carrying the king my lord's ... , when the king my lord's ... started chasing me. The king my lord ...
... the king ...
The king, my lord, knows that we are all poor; none of us has a spare penny to buy even bread and water. As soon as we have collected our debts, we shall pay them in full.
From Nergal-apil-kumu'a.
I ordered the march to the land Ḫatti. Before my arrival, Lulî, the king of the city Sidon, became frightened, escaped from the city Tyre, which is in the midst of the sea, and took to the mountain(s). I went after him (and) defeated him. I took away from him his city (and) his palace.
... of Ku...
... and ...
(As for) the goddess Šarrat-Kidmuri, who 1,635 years (ago) became angry and went to live in the land Elam, a place not befitting her, (vi 15) then, at that time (when) she — and the gods, her fathers — nominated me for ruling over the lands, she entrusted me with the return of her lordly majesty, saying: “Ashurbanipal will bring me out of the evil land Elam and make me enter Eanna (again).”
... you
owner of the vineyard being sold.
He said: "Aššur-nirka-da''in ...
1 dromedary, ...
(As to) the 1,000 archers about whom the king, my lord, wrote me: "Send (word) that 500 of them should come to my presence!" —
Witness Issar-taqqinanni.
Nabû-duru-uṣur,
Moreover, I struck with the sword Teušpa, a Cimmerian, together with his entire army, in the territory of the land Ḫubušna; I conquered Sidon, which is in the midst of the sea, caught Abdi-Milkūti, its king, like a fish, and cut off his head; I conquered the city Arzâ, which is in the neighborhood of the Brook of Egypt, threw Asuḫīli, its king, into fetters and took him to Assyria;
In place of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
... of the people of Assyria ...
The palace of Tiglath-pileser, king of Assyria: (This is) the audience gift that Abī-baʾal, king of the land Samsimuruna, presented to me.
I built (and) completed (it) from its foundations to its crenellations... I roofed it with magnificent beams of cedar. I fastened bands of silver and bronze on doors of cypress, whose fragrance is sweet, and installed (them) in its gates.
The middle of the 'station' is effaced ...
... ;
... Sargon (II)
... , Ahu-duri;
... the 'path' is curled.
I surrounded (and) conquered the city Bīt-Kilamzaḫ, their fortified city. I brought out of it people, young (and) old, horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats, and I counted (them) as booty. I destroyed, devastated, (and) turned into ruins their small(er) settlements, which were without number. I burned with fire pavilions (and) tents, their abodes, and reduced (them) to ashes.
Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, has contracted and bought (said property) from Birtayu, chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, for 1 1/2 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
Urdu-Nabû, ... , son of Daluwa
That which is (written) on the (symbols of) the gods that (are around) the neck of the god Nergal.
2 sheep, 1 bowl (of wine): his food.
Witness ... -abu-uṣur, tailor, servant of the city ...
Month Elul (VI), 13th day.
I have now sent my messenger to the commandant of Cutha. As soon as he returns to me, I shall immediately write to the king, my lord.
May I know that I can rely on the king, my lord, and that the king, my lord, will do whatever is best for me.
In the hidden depths of (its) subterranean waters I bonded together, with bitumen, reeds below (and) strong mountain stone above, then I raised a plot of land that was 340 cubits long (and) 289 cubits wide out of the water and converted (it) to dry land. I made the area larger than before, added (it) to the former dimensions of the palace, and raised its superstructure 190 courses of brick high. I made it larger than before, added (it) to the former dimensions of the palace, and raised
To the king, my lord: your servant, Bel-iddina. I pray every day to Aššur, Šamaš, Bel and Nabû for the long life, happiness and good health of the king, my lord.
I have heard that Ša-Aššur-dubbu has said to NN: "You and the Itu'eans ... go and graze in the steppe! I will go and graze in the  desert!"
In the month of Addaru, the month of the goddess Inanna, the ... day, eponymy of ... , I moved up to the land Ḫanigalbat. I conquered ... , the city of the people of the land Ḫanigalbat. I carried off 330 people, together with their possessions, their oxen, (and) their sheep and goats.
... ungelded
Silver, gold, possessions, (and) property of the land of Sumer and Akkad — Karduniaš (Babylonia), all (of it) — that the former kings of the land Elam had carried off seven times (and) brought inside the land Elam; red ṣariru-gold, shiny ešmarû-metal, precious stones, valuable jewelry, royal appurtenances, garments with multi-colored trim, linen garments, all kinds of aromatics, the furnishings of the palace of luxury, the treasures of the
The money is paid completely. Those fields, houses, gardens and people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
As to the merchants about whom my lord wrote me: "Send (word) that they should be detained until I have gathered the rest of the horses!" —
... 1/2 'litre';
The front of the atrophied part is effaced. The middle part is effaced.
Witness NN, ... of the town of Qabrina. Witness NN, ...
Bel-dan,
... you should have come ...
... to observe ...
(As for) the citizens of (the cities) Sippar, Nippur, Babylon, and Borsippa who through no fault of their own had been held captive in them (the fifteen cities), I put an end to their imprisonment and let them see the light (of day). (With regard to) their fields, which long ago, while the land was in disorder, the Sutians had taken away and appropriated for their own, I struck down (those) Sutians, the people of the steppe, with the sword. I (re)assigned to them (
From Ašaredu the older.
... the king, our lord, ...
I seized the chariots, horses, ... (and) mules that he had abandoned in the thick of battle.
... this man is your ...
Witness NN.
... the deputy (governor)
At that time the palace in the citadel of Nineveh which Ashurnasirpal (II), a king who preceded me, had built, had become dilapidated and old. I cleared away its debris, renewed and restored that palace. I built (it) from top to bottom. I made it larger than before. I built within it a royal room, anew. I constructed therein a lofty dais (and) an awesome sanctuary for the abode of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, and deposited my monumental inscription.
... the vertebrae are recessed...
adjoining the field of Šulmu-beli, ...
... ;
the house of ...
Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, king of kings, lord of lords, ruler of rulers, prince, lord of all, conqueror of the rebellious — those who do not submit to him (and) who are hostile to the god Aššur—, crusher of the lands of the Uqumanu and Papḫu — difficult mountain (regions) —, defeater of the princes of the Qutu as far as the land Meḫru, disperser of the forces of the land of
To the king, my lord: your servant Bel-upahhir. Good health to the king, my lord!
may ...
... , the god Anu, the god Adad, the god Marduk, the god Nabû, the god Sîn, the god Šamaš, the god Aya, the god Enlil, the goddess Ištar, the Sebetti, the gods of the netherworld, the gods of the city (and) the goddesses of the city (and) the goddesses of the land Ḫatti, all the gods of the lands Ḫatti and Akkad.
I, Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, ...
Witness Šulmu-šarri.
1 bag of sesame; 6 ditto of (mixed) kernels.
5 ... -garments,
Witness Tuqunu-ereš, merchant.
In the hidden depths of (its) subterranean waters I bonded together, with bitumen, reeds below (and) strong mountain stone above, then I raised a plot of land that was 340 cubits long (and) 289 cubits wide out of the water and converted (it) to dry land. I made the area larger than before, added (it) to the former dimensions of the palace, and raised its superstructure 190 courses of brick high. I made it larger than before, added (it) to the former dimensions of the palace, and raised
Witness Banî, deputy of the chief physician.
Uppammâ, bodyguard;
Witness Kenu'a, son of Sagab. Witness Nabû-nadin-ahi.
... your ...
... has ... ed
Witness Sin-na'id, ditto. Witness Nabû-šezib, ditto.
has given ...
... whether
The king of Elam ... the merchant ...
The ... s attached to the neck of the lion
... -ili, ditto;
101 cavalrymen, 100 grooms, 30 agalu-cavalrymen, in all 231 grooms.
a ditto of olives; a basket of (mixed) fruit.
... I wrote
... the 'path' is present. The 'strength' is present. The 'well-being' is present. The 'base of the throne' is present.
... 5 citizens of Babylon
... 'litres' of oil
in all 2: the 'residences' of the Nabû temple.
... to the king ...
... Ionian
I shall bring ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... the city Ḫarḫar as a fortress for that district.
x houses in the town of Qurri-duri.
... s of the Elamites ...
... the Babylonians ...
(was) the son of Nabû-zēr-kitti-līšir (who was) also governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari; Nabû-zēr-kitti-līšir (was) the son of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan); Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (was) the son of Yakīn-Lû, (who was) also governor of the land of Sūḫu and the
Now, if it is acceptable to the king, my lord, let the king command that they should be shown a house in Nineveh and live there, and let me send my domestics of foreign origin, who were settled in Nippur, to live with them, and may the(ir) exile come to an end.
... &  beer  &  Nabû-ahhe-balliṭ
Moreover, breccia, as much as is needed (for making) burzigallu-bowls, (a stone) that had never been seen before, revealed itself at Kapridargilâ (“Dargilâ Village”).
This (refers to) that Adad thunders when the moon is seen.
Witness Nanî, ditto of Nabû-ašared.
He shall pay the straw and barley in the month of Marchesvan (VIII). If he does not, it shall increase by the same amount.
or a ... , or a ... , or a worker with alum, or a merchant, or a  trader,
total, the clothing ...
... of A...
... what is that? Of the forts ...
The god Aššur, king of the gods, whose command cannot be changed, spoke unequivocally to Manesim, king of Assyria, and to Aššur-šallim-ahhe, the crown prince of the Succession Palace, (saying): “Put your trust in me (and) in the words of my lips.” They (then) placed their trust in the word(s) of the god Aššur and their own sight(s).
the town of Ṣuṣî ...
Witness Kunaya, eunuch of ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Issar-šumu-ereš. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I took away the kingship of Lulî, the king of the city Sidon. I placed Tu-Baʾlu on his throne and imposed upon him payment (in recognition) of my overlordship.
A tablet of Nabû-ašared to Nabû-balliṭ, his brother. Good health to my brother! May Nabû and Marduk bless my brother.
1, chariot driver of the chief eunuch;
Land of the Palil-arrians
2 seahs, the 21st day;
From the estate of the palace herald.
... has been done in the heart of the ram.
Your servants Nabû-belu-uṣur and Aqar-Bel-lumur: We would gladly die for the king, our lord! Say to the king, our lord: The fortress and the troops of the king are well. The mood of the people of the land is good. The king, our lord, can be glad.
(As for) the people of the city Arzâ who had thrown Padî, their king who was bound by treaty and oaths to Assyria, into iron fetters and who had handed him over to Hezekiah of the land Judah in a hostile manner, they became frightened on account of the villainous acts they had committed. They formed a confederation with the kings of Egypt (and) the archers, chariots, (and) horses of the king of the land Meluḫḫa, forces without number, and they came to their aid.
I had a statue of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, my mistress, made in silver and gold and, as constant petitioners for my life, I installed (it) in her shrine. (As for) the one who removes my inscriptions and my name: May the goddess Ištar, my mistress, break his weapon (and) hand him over to his enemies.
Abd-Nabû,
Witness Šamaš-ahu-iddina, physician.
a cup of small onions; a ditto of quinces;
Now then I have sent Nabû-uṣalla, my messenger, to the king, my lord.
They shall tie two white horses to the feet of Aššur, and bring four harbakannu horses to the feet of Nergal.
... he will take away
Samaria
Month Iyyar (II), 15th day, eponym year of Nabû-šarru-uṣur of Marqasa.
As to what you wrote to me: "A messenger of Midas the Phrygian has come to me, bringing me 12 men of Que whom Urik had sent to Urarṭu as an embassy" — this is extremely good! My gods Aššur, Šamaš, Bel and Nabû have now taken action, and without a battle or anything, the Phrygian has given us his word and become our ally!
Let the king send a letter to ... , and let them do the work!
4 basins for washing hands, of silver;
From the lamentation priest Bel-šuma-iškun.
Now that ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-reṣuwa. Good health to the king, my lord!
Simbar-Šipak, ... , son of NN, son of NN, son of NN, son of Ṣabu-damqu, (and) a long line of kingship (and) kingship (over) Assyria:
at the disposal of ...
We shall finish the ... before the king comes.
11 houses ...
the governor of ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "The son of the city-ruler of Qarnina ...
An estate of 1 hectare of land, a house, a threshing floor, a garden, and a well in Kisiri adjoining the garden of Ahi-immê, adjoining the garden of Aššur-belu-taqqin,
An estate of 2 hectares of land, field and a well,
what he wrote to me ...
Witness Nergal-apil-kumu'a, ...
... the son of Daltâ ... who ... with them ... instead of Kudurru ...
strong ...
Now, if the vizier, my lord, (so) commands, let a messenger of the vizier, my lord, come, (and) I shall return the captives.
The money is paid completely. That ... is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
May Aššur, Šamaš, Nabû, and Marduk grant long days, everlasting years, happiness, physical well-being, and joy to the king, my lord, and may they sate the king, my lord, with old age and fullness of life!
I sent (word) ...
Witness NN, ditto of Tušhan.
Seal of Sangû-Issar, owner of the ... being sold.
(Palace of) Sennacherib, king of Assyria. Whoever erases my inscribed name (or) places (it) in the service of a god (or another) person, may the deities Aššur, ... , (and) ... make his name (and) his seed disappear.
Tab-shar-Sin, his wife, his 3 daughters, a total of 5;
... they have changed
To the king, my lord: Your servant Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
You offer cooked meat before Belet-ili, make a flour/incense-offering, pour oil, honey, beer and wine, and sing: “Mighty ... of Apsû, wife of Ea, is strong and descends into the netherworld.”
To the chief haruspex, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to my lord! Say to the chief haruspex, my lord: The king of Elam ... has sent a large payment to ...
Aššur-rēša-iši, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Mutakkil-Nusku, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-dān (I) (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of Aššur:
... I ...
... to the magnates ...
You, the goddess Ištar ...
... The coils of the colon are 14 in number...
The goddess Ištar, lady of war and battle, who loves my priestly service,
I set Šarru-lū-dāri, son of Rūkibtu, their former king, over the people of the city Ashkelon and imposed upon him the payment of tribute (and) gifts (in recognition) of my overlordship so that he (now) pulls my yoke.
Disregard that they inflict a defeat and plunder the countryside...
At that time the temple of the god Aššur, my lord, which Aššur-nādin-aḫḫē (II), vice-regent of Aššur, my forefather, had previously built — that temple had become dilapidated and I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I rebuilt the temple from top to bottom. I restored it and deposited my monumental inscription.
He shall pay the capital of the house, the capital of the fields and the capital of the orchards.
A thigh, a shoulder, ribs, leftovers — the goddess Dilbat.
... the vizier
in all, 1 son of his, of his own, the rest of the crown prince's entourage.
The kurgarrûs sing, “O lord of kings, how excellent is the king of the gods, Enlil!” The kulgarrûs sing, “O lord of kings, how excellent is the king of the gods, Enlil!”
Witness NN, chief ...
From ... ya.
... of the land ... , (including) the district of ... , the land ... , the land ... , the city Aššur-... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the city ... , the
... his servant: "...
NN and his people
Bel-naplis,
A hat, a scarf, a bedspread: the Inner City.
Witness Sagibî, ditto.
The gall bladder is flattened and is located on its back.
x minas of silver of ... , merchant.
Witness Nergal-šarru-uṣur, chariot driver.
If the moon is surrounded by a black halo: the month holds rain.
In the eponymy of Aššur-daʾʾinanni, son of Tiglath-pileser (III), I marched a second time to the land Ḫanigalbat. I conquered the city Ḫadabatu, the royal city of Ṣidqâ, the Patinu.
... the town Aššur-le'i
On the day that ... the god ... to me ... I shall not forget ...
... let them speak
If Jupiter stands behind the moon: the king of the land will stand in triumph.
And as to what my lord wrote to me: "...
Moreover, (as for) Ṣidqâ, the king of the city Ashkelon who had not bowed down to my yoke, I forcibly removed the gods of his father’s house, himself, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his brothers, (and other) offspring of his father’s house and took him to Assyria.
And as to the news of the city of the king, my lord,  as soon as I have met the messenger, I shall immediately write to the  Palace.
The prince who accepts their gifts, the shepherd who  has charge over them, and the herdsman (who properly administers them,  I):
15 ditto black, 15 ditto irginu-coloured,
... ever since the king, my lord, appointed me, I have been revering the  king, my lord.
We have sent the salves and fumigants which the king ordered.
... into ...
... the city Ḫuzirina ... which from the time of the kings, my ancestors, had been tribute and which from the time of Aššur-rēša-iši (I), my father, had ceased to give (tribute). I took that city in hand for myself.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Inurta-ila'i and his sons, whether his brothers or his nephews, shall pay one talent of tin to the governor of his city.
Concerning the man in charge of the ... , about whom you wrote to me:
... the river Uqnû, six stages ...
An estate of 1 hectare 5 decares of land adjoining (the fields of) Aššur-matu-taqqin, Ilu-mušezib, Kakkullanu, and (the fields of) Nergal-nirka-da''in and Aššur-matu-taqqin;
Witness Qurdi-Aššur, son of Ša-Nabû-šû.
From Nergal-eṭir.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to his servant: "Be very attentive!" – I am constantly attentive to the king's affairs.
The word of the king to the elders of the land of Sūḫu and the elders of the land of Mari: I am well, you may be glad. I have provided for you (pl.).
If a planet comes close to the top of the moon, stops, and enters  the moon: the king of the world will die, and there will be a rebellion in the land; the son of the king will seize the throne; he will restore the temples and establish sacrifices of the gods; he will provide jointly for (all) the temples.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
What ...
Witness Bel-...
Witness Nabû-na'id, eunuch of Nabû-apla-iddina.
Mitinti of the land Ashkelon neglected the loyalty oath (sworn by) the great gods (... and) revolted against me. He (Mitinti) saw the defeat of Raḫiānu (Rezin) (... ) and became afraid, (ii 5') then he abandoned the city Ashkelon and fled to the city Gaza... the city Ashkelon ... my ... I placed ... over them.
... he opened
This is its interpretation.
and the king's steward.
(As for) Necho, king of the cities Memphis and Sais, Šarru-lū-dāri, king of the city Pelusium, Pi-šan-Ḫuru, king of the city Natho, Pa-qruru, king of the city (Pi)šaptu, (ii 55) Inaros (Niḫerau), king of the city Athribis, (and) Naḫkê, king of the city Heracleopolis, those kings, governors, (and) officials whom the father who had
If the moon is surrounded by a halo, and two stars stand in the halo with the moon: a reign of long days.
From the beginning of my reign until my seventeenth palû, I captured the (tribes) Ituʾu, Rubuʾu, Ḫamarānu, Luḫuʾatu, Ḫaṭallu, Rubbû, Rapiqu, Nabātu, Gurumu, Dunanu, Ubulu, Ruʾuʾa, Liʾtaʾu, Marusu, ...
1 prayer bowl ditto;
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šarru-uṣur, who guards the 'mule house' at Borsippa. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! I am herewith sending to the king, my lord, the 'mule house man' Akkullanu and the scribe Babilayu. They have something to say.
Witness NN, commander-of-fifty.
1,000 stalks of vine ... ;
Nergal-apil-kumua,
This year dates ...
at the disposal of Šer-Issar.
10 ditto, hallam;
(As for) Ummanigaš, the king of the land Elam who had seen the rage of the weapon of (the god) Aššur, my lord, he returned from the mountain(s), his place of refuge, and he entered the city Madaktu, which I had destroyed, demolished, (and) plundered by the command of (the god) Aššur, my lord.
Let the king, my lord, write me what the king commands.
... you did not give
Two horses in harness from Calah, of the palace herald, have come in.
If there is a 'weapon'-mark in the top of the left surface of the 'finger,' it is the weapon of the prince.
... they abandoned their rites and ... they were inciting criminal acts (and) infringing on a taboo, in ... and in ... , (and) were fomening a conspiracy.
Witness Šulmu-ahhe, ditto.
Month of Shebat (XI), 22nd day, eponym year of Sin-šarru-uṣur, palace scribe.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
... I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether ... of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, ...
... have been receiving
Witness Ṭab-šar-Nabû, scribe, keeper of the contract.
... of the country ...
... he is ...
If the earth quakes in the month of Tebet (X): the ruler will be humiliated in the land of his enemy.
the town of Tina... ,
... have been bought and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments...
If you should hear improper things about Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, either from the mouth of his father, or from the mouth of his grandfather, or from the mouth of his uncles, or from the mouth of his ... , or from the mouth of the ... of his palace, or from the mouth of the ... of his country, you shall speak up and come to Zakutu his mother;
Witness Nergal-ahu-uṣur, commander-of-fifty of ...
Of the Itu'eans ...
... house ...
3,000 (homers) wheat (consumed) per year.
The governor of ...
... the king, my lord
... of the king ...
One ditto — Šumma-Aššur, fowler.
At that time, (with regard to) the akītu-house of the goddess Ištar, my lady, the inner sanctum, the place of my lady’s secret lore, the place of her secret rites, the place of her secret rituals, (which) a long time ago had become old, whose foundation(s) had become weak, (and) whose walls had buckled, I removed its buckled walls that had become weak and (then) I examined (and) checked its original foundation(s). I secured its foundation(s) on the breast of the netherworld
Shep-Aššur, ditto of the chief treasurer;
... -ibni
... is not present. The base of the middle 'finger' of the lung is 'loose.' The breast-bone is thick...
10 ...
... of the ... s of the Gambulu tribe.
I have been informed that the palace in the Succession Palace is available for the king my lord's use."
The threshing floor, garden and spring are not included in the sale. The buyer shall pay the straw and barley at the threshing floor in the centre of Nineveh.
which ... and ...
... he has ... ed my ...
5 shekels of silver: the queen.
... the lands Namri, ... , Bīt-Sangibūti, ... , Bīt-Ḫamban, ... , Sumurzu, Bīt-Barrūa, ... , (and) Bīt-Zualzaš, (8) the land of the Ubulu, ...
... to Marduk-apla-iddina
The day that the king, my lord, seated me on the royal throne, I sent my official to the people of Kish: "The king has given me the governorship of Kish." They went running and grasped my feet in Babylon.
I have made the stone thresholds and am herewith sending them to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should send word whether they should be placed in the middle of the temple or on the right and left.
... of the Itu'eans ... has been brought to me from ... , and I have appointed him over them. Now ...
And after I had finished the work on my lordly palace, broadened the squares, (and) brought light into the alleys (and) streets, making (them) as bright as day, I invited inside it (the palace) the god Ḫaldi, the goddess Bagbartu, (and) the gods of the city Ḫarrān ...
... the town of Dadi-bir-Aya, a distance of six leagues from the bank of the Euphrates as far as the town of Dunni-Šamaš, a distance of seven leagues from the town of Dunni-Šamaš as far as the town of Ṣuṣani
Tomorrow the king will hear (about it), and the king will kill me on account of the fact that I have not consumed ... The king should give orders that they lead away the corpses of the people who died through my hands.
The palace of Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria.
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria: property of the temple of the god Aššur.
adjoining the field of NN,
Let the king, my lord, send a letter to the ... , and let them bring the boats to me.
I sent (word) ...
Witness Ninuayu, ...
I sent ...
19 in all from the temple of Ninurta;
Witness Abunu.
a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
For his life and the well-being of his city the great wall of New City
NN, royal bodyguard;
He shall pay in Tebet (X). If he does not pay, it shall increase by a fourth.
From Nabû-šuma-iškun.
in all, 4 farmers; 1 son of 4 spans' height; 1, of 3 spans' height; 1, weaned; 1, suckling.
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
Witness Šer-barakki, cook.
On my return march, I defeated all together the Tuʾumuna, Riḫiḫu, Yadaqqu, Ubudu, Gibrê, Maliḫu (Malaḫu), Gurumu, Ubulu, Damunu, Gambulu, Ḫindaru, Ruʾuʾa, Puqudu, Ḫamrānu, Ḫagarānu, Nabatu, (and) Liʾtaʾu, insubmissive Arameans. I carried off into Assyria a substantial boot
To the king, my lord: your servant, Nabû-ahhe-šallim. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord. The ... of the king, my lord, is well. The ... of the king, my lord, is well.
... Aššur-šumu-kīn
May a later prince restore it (and) return my inscribed name to its place. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
Shalmaneser, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil and vice-regent of Aššur:
... wrote to me
If the Pleiades enter the moon and come out to the north: Akkad will become happy; the king of Akkad will become strong.
And the message ...
Witness Azi-da... , ...
Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the chief eunuch, one who had deserved well of my father and begetter, who had led me constantly like a father, installed me safely on the throne of my father and begetter and made the people of Assyria, great and small, keep watch over my kingship during my minority, and respected my royalty.
5 minas of silver, 5 togas, 5 tunics, 1 potful of iced fish, 1 creel of 100 fish, all tribute: the Palace Superintendent;
If you hear any improper, unsuitable or unseemly word concerning the exercise of kingship which is unseemly and evil against Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, either from the mouth of his brothers, his uncles, his cousins, his family (var. his people), members of his father's line; or from the mouth of magnates and governors, or from the mouth of the bearded and the eunuchs, or from the mouth of the scholars or from the mouth of any human being at all, you shall not conceal it but come
To the palace scribe, my brother: your brother Adad-šumu-uṣur and  Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health to my brother!
1 pipe ... for ... ;
in all 6 witnesses from Gambulu.
in all 2 persons, an estate of 10 hectares of land ... , a house ... in Nineveh —
The governor of Waisi has written to me: "The messenger of the son of Yakin has come to me; he says:
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-šar-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord!
the month of Kuzallu, the ... day, eponymy of ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
I have sent ... to the king, my lord; the king, my lord, may do as he deems best.
... who went
He said: "I have seen it. The ...
The people ... the houses
The money is paid completely. That land is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
An estate of 3 decares of throne land, a garden, a well and a grazing land belonging to these men —
Witness NN, royal bodyguard.
If the king, my lord, so orders, I will send them over with a palace servant.
... the prince
... Bel-ereš
... is not to blame for ...
The 'cavity' of the left lung is split...
On the 30th of Adar (XII), if the moon is not seen, it will let the eclipse pass by.
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-alik-pani. Good health to the king, my lord!
I went where the god Aššur sent me to. I marched to Mount Lebanon. I cut down (and) carried off cedar beams for the temple of the god Aššur, my lord. I continued to the land Amurru (and) conquered the entire land Amurru. I received tribute from the lands Byblos, Sidon, (and) Arwad.
2 cuts of shoulders. Of 1 ox: the stomach, the liver,
The city of the queen mother, Aššur-muballissu, is well.
... the gods of Nabû-ahhe-... the chief ...
Sennacherib, ... , the father of the father who had engendered me, ...
The breast-bone is thick...
Ša-la-ili-mannu, his servant —
... from the day that ...
... to the land Katmuḫu ... the city Šara... I took ... without number. I carried off ... , 300 talents of ... , 200 talents of ... , 100 talents of ... , 200 talents of ... , 100 talents of ... , 200 talents of ... , 100 talents of ... , 200 talents of ... , 100 talents of ... , 200 talents of ... , 100 talents of ... , 200 talents of ... , 100 talents of ...
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
3 (cuts of) meat, of 6 (oxen),
Witness Šarru-lu-dari.
In my accession year (and) in my first regnal year, after I nobly ascended the royal throne, ... I mustered my chariotry (and) troops. I conquered the lands of the Qumānu (and) the Šubaru. The lands of the Qumānu (and) the Šubaru, (which) had not bowed down to the yoke of my lordship, I brought (them) to my city Aššur. I placed a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over them. I annexed those lands to Assyria
in the city ...
shall place 10 minas of silver (and) one mina of gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
in all 60 horses and mules, 41 of them (being) in the possession of Nabû-ahu-iddina, ... , 29 ... of Nabû-ahu-iddina ...
has taken ...
Witness NN, scribe of the crown prince.
To the goddess Šarrat-Kidmuri, the lady of the lands, his lady: Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tiglath-pileser (III), king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (III), (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria, dedicated (this object) for his life.
... -nadin-ahi, a servant of the governor of ... , has ... ed a plot of land in the city of Kannu', a town under the authority of the commander-in-chief, and given it to his son.
... this ...
NN, 11 oxen,
The gods on the left of Aššur:
(As for) the one who destroys an inscribed object bearing my name, (the name of) my father, (and the name of) my grandfather, (or) does not place (it) with an inscribed object bearing his name, may the great gods of heaven and netherworld overthrow his kingship, deprive him of his life, (and) make his name (and) seed disappear from the land.
... to the ...
Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver of the crown prince, has contracted and bought them from Babilayu for x minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
2 minas of silver, of the meal ... ;
I have written to the son of Yakin: "... "
of the fort ...
17 ditto of garlic;
Witness Tabalayu, ša šēpi guard.
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, then I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, fortified cities, together with the small(er) settlements (ii 15') in their environs (and) the district of the land Bīt-Barrû in its entirety, and
The front of the base-board, nailed.
... into the presence of the chief ...
(But as for) the one who by some crafty device destroys an inscription written in my name or changes its position, may the goddess Ištar, great lady, glare at him angrily and make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the land!
To the king, my lord: your servant, Ašipâ. May Bel and Nabû bless the king, my lord.
I brought out Padî, their king, from the city Jerusalem and placed (him) on the lordly throne over them, then I imposed upon him payment (in recognition) of my overlordship.
Aḫšēri heard about the advance of my expeditionary force and abandoned the city Izirtu, his royal city. He fled to the city Atrāna, a city upon which he relied, (and) took refuge (there). I surrounded the cities Izirtu, Urmēte, (and) Uzbia, his fortified cities... his ...
The god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises.
... it is not ...
... 1 ...
... of ...
I, Aššur-etel-ilāni, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Ashurbanipal, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Esarhaddon, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also vice-regent of the god Aššur; the one who (re)constructed the temple of the god Aššur, (re)built Esagil and Babylon, restored the shrines of cult centers, completed
... ;
His sons together with the son of ...
... and the arrow ...
Witness Šer-abu-uṣur,
... the base of the middle 'finger' of the lung ...
Witness Addî.
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, then I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, fortified cities, together with the small(er) settlements (ii 15') in their environs (and) the district of the land Bīt-Barrû in its entirety, and
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "In the month of Adar (XII) ... do the work in the temple of DN!" — the work is done, the temple of DN has been completely built. The king, my lord, may (now) do as he deems best.
Saturn (is equivalent to) the moon; it is favorable.
If a planet is red: the enemy's land will be reduced.
(As for) Nergal-šarru-uṣur, who had taken away the property of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh and the goddess Ištar of Arbela, (and) had appropriated it for himself, (and) had even stripped off the skin from the wall of the temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, I overthrew his kingship, smashed his weapons, (and) had him taken into bondage.
... red, ... ;
The god has opened your ears ...
The vertebrae are recessed. First extispicy...
I removed the gods of the (full) extent of my land and the lands that I had conquered, (and) the royal symbol(s) of my city Aššur and the royal symbol(s) of the land Ḫatti (Syria-Palestine), all of them, and I counted (them) as booty. I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire the cities of the land of the Arabs, as many as I had conquered.
I have ... ed against you ...
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
The king has made the servant's house smaller than before. A servant of mine who was in Nippur lost his field because of it, and I myself have no field to cultivate. What shall I do?
Witness ... -le'i, ...
The king, my lord, can be glad.
let him not ... in the presence of the king,
Because of the evil deeds which he had committed against me and the fact that he had not feared my lordship, (iii 30') at the command of the gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl and Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela, in the month Ulūlu (VI) — “the work of the goddesses,” the month of the king of the gods, (the god) Aššur, the father of the gods, the god Nunnamnir — like
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-reši-išši. May  Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
At that time, (with regard to) the enclosure wall of Ezida (“True House”) which had become old and whose foundation had become weak, during my reign, I renovated its dilapidated sections and made (them) high as a mountain.
Ashurnasirpal, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of Aššur:
and ...
What (orders) does the king, my lord, send? Let them be brought to me ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Balasî. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Witness Nabû-eriba, deputy.
Witness Handu, tailor.
4 ... s of ... ;
NN, deputy (governor) of Barhalza;
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Šamaš-šumu-ibni (712 B.C.).
I shall send the deputy of the palace superintendent to take them down. He will  set out as soon as he has received them.
Seal of Adad-ahu-iddina, owner of the people being sold.
He shall place x minas of refined silver and x minas of pure gold in the lap of DN.
I shall bring the ploughs ...
What ...
A tablet of Auriga to the palace scribe, my lord. Good health to my lord!
I have received ... of the ... of ... , and have delivered them ... as the king, my lord, commanded.
... Mannu-ki-...
... I made ... bow down at my feet... by the command of ... , the chief archer of the god Asari, I went up to the mountain(s)... I established therein my royal image. I built a city in the mountain(s)
(As to) what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let two of your ... s go with the ... , and let them ... the work in ... !" — I went with them, and they did the work in ... Just as the king wrote to me, the work ... , and I did not go near them.
Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, has contracted and bought (said property) from these gentlemen for 8 1/2 minas of silver by the mina of the king. He has (already) paid the price in full to the gentlemen ...
I have taken the Mannean emissaries who were in my presence (and) 30 horses from the town Urakka. They are at my disposal.
... of my lord ...
The bull colossus of Duyanusi is finished and we have loaded it on a boat. Let them write me what the king my lord's orders are.
From the city of Lahiru as far as the city of Arrapḫa, on the border of Arpad, there are 100 cavalry mounts, 300 foot soldiers, (and) 100 shield (bearers). From the city of Arrapḫa as far as the city of Ḫindānu, on the border of Damascus, there are 100 cavalry mounts (and) 300 foot soldiers.
Isana
(As for) Aḫšēri, who did not fear my lordly majesty, (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar placed him in the hands of his servants. The people of his land incited a rebellion against him (and) they cast his corpse into a street of his city. They dragged his body to and fro before the gate of his city (while) they sang, “The city is set upon a hill.”
... the king, my lord
If the rising of Enmešarra is very red: it will increase the floods.
If Venus becomes visible in Sivan (III): the king of the land will fall.
Total 7, of Adad-...
in all 6 women ... ;
... of the king, my lord,
of the king from ...
... you did not bring the audience gift ...
Witness Bar-... , mayor of Calah.
to ...
... came ...
(As for) Bēl-iqīša, who sat on the throne of the land Elam after Ummanaldašu (Ḫumban-ḫaltaš III), (vii 10') when he saw the assault of my mighty battle array, he abandoned the city Madaktu, a royal city of his, and fled to the city Dūr-Undāsi. He then made that city his fortress... He saw the assault of my mighty battle array and ...
I had a stele made, had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, written on it, and I erected (it) on the plain of the city Ḫalulê.
... the river Ulāya
The 'well-being' is overturned ...
NN and his people, Iglî and his people,
The house of the palace herald has ... ed the ... of the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, (live to) 100 years!
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial payment from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
... jar of wine ...
In that year, in the month Duʾūzu, I had a palace of breccia, alabaster, and ... -stone, (a palace that I named) Ešgalšiddudua (“The Palace Without a Rival”), constructed thereon as my royal residence.
... s of ... of the ... of the house of his lords.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let 1,000 archers come to my presence to receive my blessings" — if  the archers come to my presence, let them first of all come to Sippar,  where their prefects are, and let them receive the king's blessings there.  Afterwards they may come to my audience. As to the prefects who are  in Sippar, let the king, my lord, send word that they should let the archers  come. Alternatively, the king, my lord, may
... the 'outside' rides upon the 'cap' ...
sent ...
... (As for) the people who were guilty, I imposed a harsh punishment upon them. (viii 10'') I killed them with the sword in the midst of the land where they were living. I did not spare a single one. I hung their corpses on poles and placed (them) around the city. I reorganized that district (and) imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the gods of Assyria, my lords. (viii
... The king, my lord, knows that I have no servants who can take care of the king's work. If the king, my lord, (so) commands, let a royal bodyguard come and appoint a certain number of men under the command of Bel-le'i son of Eṭir-Marduk, and let them do the work of the king, my lord, and deliver it to the king, my lord.
If the Scales' position is stable: there will be reconciliation and peace in the land.
which is before ...
I dismantled the outposts that I had constructed against Baʾalu, the king of the land Tyre. By sea and dry land, I opened (all of) his routes, as many as I had seized. I received from him his substantial payment. I turned around (lit. “I turned the front of my yoke”) and returned safely to Nineveh, my capital city.
Witness Ṣil-Aya, cohort commander.
... the name of the great goddess ...
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Set out ... on the 1st of Tishri (VII)!" — where ... ?
10 ditto, hallam;
Witness Šep-Aššur, ...
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord.
Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, who has now written the name of a man of his choosing in the papyrus and placed it before your great divinity, and (whom) your great divinity knows —
2 talents, the royal bodyguard;
... ;
The king of Babylon, the one who had disturbed the land of Akkad, was struck by a stroke in the city of Akkad and died a premature death. His young brother, who had no business (or) anything to do with the land of Akkad, seized the throne of Babylon.
Witness Šumma-ahhe.
... the exorcist, the physician, the auger, the ... , the carpenter, the smith, the goldsmith, the hatter, the ... , the weaver, the ... , the boatman, the reed-worker, the ... , the ... , the oath-brother, the ... , the wainwright, the architect, the scribe, the accountant, the notary, the herald, the judge, the advocate, the lawyer, the royal delegate, the overseer of the palace, the steward, the manager of the household, the cook, the
I ordered the march to the city Madaktu, his royal city. In the month Ṭebētu (X), bitter cold set in and continuous rain fell, and I was afraid of the snow in the gorges, the outflows of the mountains, (so) I turned around and took the road to Assyria.
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let them write to Lansî" —
... the heart ...
Witness Uqur-tabni.
(As for) the land Patušarri, a district in the area of the salt desert, which is in the midst of the land of the distant Medes, borders Mount Bikni, the lapis lazuli mountain, (iii 30') (and) upon the soil of whose land none of the kings, my ancestors, had walked — I carried off to Assyria Šidir-parna (and) E-parna, mighty chieftains, who were not submissive to (my) yoke, together with their people, their riding horses, oxen
1 bow-case of boxwood, polished:
... the Urarṭian(s) ...
From the beginning of my reign until my ... teenth palû, I captured the (tribes) Ituʾu, Rubuʾu, Ḫamarānu, Luḫuʾatu, Ḫaṭallu, Rubbû, Rapiqu, Nabātu, Gurumu, Dunanu, Ubulu, Ruʾuʾa, Liʾtaʾu, Marusu, (and those living in) the cities Dūr-Kurigalzu, Adinni, the fortresses of Sarragitu (
... the land of Uriakka
The god Aššur, the lord, commanded me to march to the land Nairi. I went down to the land Nairi. I conquered the lands Byblos, Sidon, (and) Arwad (and) the city Arwad (ii 15) whose dwellings are situated on the shore of the Great Sea. I took away from them their kingship. I made a royal image of myself (and) erected it in their midst. I conquered the lands Ḫatti (and) Aramu. I took away from them their kingship.
... of Elam
Does your great divinity know it? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Disregard the (formulation) of the prayer for today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-belu-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! The city of Der and the fort are well.
He ...
total, ...
The sons of the king, your father, are your sons!
... will they attack each other? Will the weapons of the Elamites prevail over the weapons of the Assyrians?
... bari
I have given the arrows back to the archers, but they have not agreed to  go near the trees, saying: "We shall not go near the trees; we shall  only shoot the arrows on the enemy."
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Witness Nabû-abu-uṣur, ...
Witness Silim-ili, ...
The town of Sari... ,
... , ...
1 ... , 1 servant of ... ,
... of the town Gadisê ...
... road ...
... their ... s
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, unrivalled king, pious shepherd who reveres the great gods, guardian of truth who loves justice, renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the insubmissive, (and) the one who strikes enemies with lightning:
... rima ... the lady Ma...
(As for) the rest of the Arabs who had fled from my weapons, the heroic god Erra struck (them) down. Famine broke out among them and they ate the flesh of their children on account of their hunger. The deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Adad, and Ištar, my lords, decreed curses, as many as were written in their treaties, accordingly upon them. Fear of the gods, my lords, overwhelmed them and they died of hunger.
The moon will complete the day in this month.
As I was walking with him, he says to me: "You are an expert in divination? Tell me, why have you not told me the truth? I will go and tell the king ... ; as for you, if the king does not believe me, ... "
If a planet in the sky produces a mišhu: the palace of the king will fall.
250 archers,
20 minas of black wool;
... and they are constantly blessing the king, my lord.
Witness ... -zeri, ditto.
1 seah 1 'litre' of regular offering loaves;
The mother of the king is doing very well; the king ... very well.
I brought back all together the chariots along with their horses, whose drivers had been killed in the thick of (that) mighty battle and which had themselves been released so that they galloped about on their own. When the second double-hour of the night had passed, I stopped their slaughter.
4 ... ;
... the house of ... in the centre of Nineveh, adjoining the house of NN and the house of Šumma-ilu, ...
Let the king, my lord, decide what his orders are and write me.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. The very  best of health to the king, my lord!
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, (or) changed or altered the proceedings...
a ditto of small onions;
... his ... s
Moreover, as for him, the terrifying splendor of (the god) Aššur, my lord, overwhelmed him and he passed away.
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-naṣir. Good health to the king, my lord!
We set out on the 29th and went as far as Šabirešu; the king, my lord, should know (this).
... , ... -zeru-... ;
5 ditto — Il-hananu
I myself prayed to the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl, Nabû, Nergal, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela, the gods who support me, for victory over (my) strong enemy and they immediately heeded my prayers (and) came to my aid.
... to ... to greet the king ... As for you, do ... !
If on the 14th day the moon and sun are seen together: reliable speech; the land will become happy; the gods will remember Akkad favorably.
I offered to the goddess Ištar of Uruk 22,000 sheep, 20,000 ducks, 20,000 geese, 20,000 pigeons, 20,000 birds of the heavens (lit. “flying birds of the sky”), 20,000 fish, (and) 20,000 jerboas.
... you, who ...
the talent of the metallurgist ...
they are transporting ...
... 2 female ...
Witness Ahi-immê, witness Hana-kiṣir.
From the city of Kar-Tukulti-Ninurta ... , the merchant (lit. “their merchant”) who sells the goods has been arrested. They have arrested him in the centre of Nineveh, and are bringing him to me.
The palace of Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I), king of Assyria: booty of the land Ḫatti.
If there is a solar eclipse in Nisan (I) on the 14th day, it begins in the east and clears in the west: the king of the Westland will rule the Eastland, variant: the king of the Eastland will rule the Westland; a foreigner will rule the land of the king, my lord.
1 goose, 1 duck, 10 turtledoves.
To the king, my lord: your servant Akkullanu. Good health to the king,  my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
From Nabû-šuma-iškun.
Palace of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria.
Any revocation, lawsuit or litigation is void.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
I have made (them) into a cohort. They will be in my presence by the 1st of Nisan (I).
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also strong king, king of the world, (and) king of Assyria; valiant man who acts with the support of Aššur, his lord, and has no rival among the princes of the four quarters, marvelous shepherd, fearless in battle, might
The maidservant of the governor of Arrapha, the sister of the ... , and the maidservant of the chief ... — three persons are missing from the (enemy) country, at the disposal of the governess of ...
Witness Bel-...
I shall do and finish  ...
The royal bodyguard Aššur-šallim-ahhe came to me in the  presence of the crown prince, and I gave to him the royal bodyguard Adad-ibni  and the royal bodyguard Mannu-ki-Aššur, the cohort commander of the  crown prince, as well as the royal bodyguard Nergal-eṭir. He gave them  orders concerning the work to be done, and they went and started to do it. The royal bodyguard Aššur-šallim-ahhe came to me again, saying: "The
God Aššur, great lord, king of all the great gods; god Anu, king of the Igīgū and Anunnakū gods, lord of the lands; god Enlil, exalted one, father of the gods, creator of (5) all; god Ea, king of the apsû, lord of wisdom (and) understanding; god Sîn, king of the lunar disk, lofty luminary; god Adad, the exceptionally strong, lord of abundance; god Šamaš, judge of heaven (and) underworld, commander of all
The one who has gathered to himself (all) rites and ordinances, who has collected (all) ancient and modern ordinances, who has made (all) the cult centers bow down at his feet, who has gathered (all) the powers of the gods and humankind, who has gathered (all) the royal powers of the kings of the four quarters (of the world), who has gathered (all) the royal titles of the kings who preceded (him), who has gathered (all) the royal duties of the kings who succeeded (him), who has gathered (all) the royal privileges of the kings
From Nabû'a of Assur.
... -Nergal, son of Aššur-nirka-da''in
Witness ... -ilu, eunuch.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did you not write me (about the progress) of the work?" I am (now) writing to the king, my lord:
Nabû-gamil, ... ; 2 sons, of 3 spans' height each;
Nabû-naṣir, staff-bearer;
total, 4 ... ;
If an anomaly is male and female and has no testicles: a courtier will command the land, variant: will rebel against the king, variant: will seize the throne.
There is a hole in the left of the gall bladder which faces the base of the 'finger.'
... your ...
Witness Zarutî, scribe.
Witness Ahu-illika, chief of the replacements.
The vizier, my lord, should know (this).
Let the king ask the master-builders; they know whether I am right in this matter.
Sukkaya,
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
(As for) the people who had engaged in rebellion (and) revolt against ... , the governor, (and) the officials whom I had appointed in the land Nairi, (viii 10'') I defeated (them) on the plain of the city Ḫalulê. I seized the chariots, wagons, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, (and) Bactrian camels that they had abandoned during the battle. I carried off into Assyria a substantial booty (consisting of) 208,00
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, I: With baked bricks from a (ritually) pure kiln, I had the Step Gate of the Palace in Baltil (Aššur) built anew and I raised (it) as high as a mountain.
the stomachs, livers, kidneys, hearts.
The king, my lord, can be glad.
In the time of Aššur-nādin-ahi, king of Assyria.
The king of Elam heard about the capture of his cities and fear fell upon him. He made the rest of the people of his land go up into fortresses.
... my messenger
As to Nabû-aplu-iddina ... , the servant of the crown prince about whom  his brother wrote to me: "He should come" —
The king of Assyria marched ...
This is the (interpretation) of the observation of the planet Venus.
Now I have written to open your ears; be very attentive!
(As for) the exalted chariot, the vehicle of the god Marduk, the pre-eminent one among the gods, the lord of lords, I completed its feature(s) with gold, silver, (and) precious stones. I gave (it) as a gift to the god Marduk, the king of the totality of heaven and netherworld, the one who overwhelms my enemies.
adjoining the house of Marduk-ereš, adjoining the house of Mušallim-Ninurta,
The judgement which the king imposed upon me:
Of the (people) of Ḫanṭasanu, a servant of the king who lives in the house of the crown prince, (and) the house of the crown prince itself.
They have been sent to ... ; let the king, my lord, ask.
The king, my lord, should know that the city of Ṣimirra is situated on a hill. If it is acceptable to the king, my lord, the troops of the king should enter the city of Ṣimirra and stay there.
10 shoots (of sesame);
He has seized the house of his lord and turned it into a house of his own. He has sold all the servants of his lord and given them to his own household.
From Ašaredu.
I, Aqar-Babili, the man who is devoted to the king, my lord, who has been totally devoted to the king, my lord, since the day that the king, my lord, appointed me, (and) who has not sought favor from any other king or any other lord, (but) has sought favor from the king, his lord, alone —
... the king should not say: "He is a citizen of Babylon; the servants of the house of my lords ... should not ... me."
10, the tablet of ... ,
20,000 stalks of vine near the city of Ṣimirra;
(All) the lands from where the sun rises to where it sets belong to the king.
When the lord (Marduk) is angry, the Igīgū gods in heaven cannot endure his arrogance.
... , ... -belu-uṣur, ...
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, pious prince, humble, respectful, who knows how to revere the gods and goddesses, the one who (re)constructed the temple of the god Aššur, (re)built Esagil and Babylon, renewed the statues of the great gods, (and) who returned the plundered gods of the lands to their (proper) place from Assyria; the king who plated Egašankal
(If) a planet comes close to the front of the moon and stands there: the king of the land will live for many days.
Witness Nabû-ahhe-iddina, baker.
The king has provided for me, until the end of days.
The son of Zabinu, the Gambulean, has come to my presence. I asked him: "Why did you come now? The ... of the king, my lord, is ... "
The god Ninurta, the warrior, the one who loves my priesthood, gave to me the wild beasts and commanded me to hunt. I killed 300 lions from my ... chariot with my wildly vigorous assault with the spear. I killed 200 wild bulls with my wildly vigorous assault with the spear. I killed 100 ostriches like caged birds with the spear. I killed 100 ostriches with the spear.
the forts ...
... the Ruqahu tribe
Witness Didî.
2 jerboas;
The 26th day: at the gate of the god (and) the god will be seen.
a bowl of haršu (and mixed) fruit. A flagon of ... -beer;
... that you have done is good for me ...
the governor of Calah ...
Qarhâ, son of Dusî, ditto; 1 son of 4 spans' height; 1 woman: a total of 4 people.
1 ... -garment, 1 ... -garment of Bel-eṭir, 1 ... -garment of Mannu-ki-... ;
Witness Puṭi-še.
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, unrivalled king, pious shepherd who reveres the great gods, guardian of truth who loves justice, renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the insubmissive, (and) the one who strikes enemies with lightning:
... he burns female kids as on the 6th day.
The bread of the temple is excellent, the best of the temple  service is well. The guard of the temple is very strong.
1 of carnelian for 1.
Witness Mušezib-Aššur, ...
... his son
... by the command of the goddess Ištar
Witness Se'-ila'i, ditto.
Palace of Sargon (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad;
News of the son of Yakin: he has crossed the river ...
... I have ...
... The king, my lord, knows that all the chariot drivers and all the grooms of the royal guard have the usufruct of the sheep of the temple. Should they take away (even) one sheep from the (offering) sheep of the temple, I would die on account of it.
... Šumu-ukin, the son of the rab sikkāti
Under the protection of Aššur, my lord, I marched to the land of the Qumānu (and) conquered the entire land of the Qumānu. I received tribute from the land of the Qumānu (and) from the city Susa. I approached the city Madaktu, the royal city of Kudurru of the land Sūḫu. Fear of Aššur, my lord, overwhelmed Kudurru and he fled to the land Guzummānu. I conquered the city Madaktu (and) carried off his property
... they have shipped off to Babylon
NN, chariot driver of the palace ... ;
The singer intones, “My sweet Ṣil-Ešarra, my sweet Ṣil-Ešarra, my sweet Ṣil-Ešarra.” After it, they say: “May they rest, may they rest!” The singer intones, “O Daughter-of-the-River, O Daughter-of-the-River.” After it, they say: “Go about, go about, you rivers!”
Will ... to the citizens of Assur, to the temple of Aššur and to the citizens of Babylon ... the statues of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, and of Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, (my) brother, which are in Assyria and Babylon?
... her ...
... their men
You shall not give Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, a deadly drug to eat or to drink, nor anoint him with it, nor practice witchcraft against him, nor make gods and goddesses angry with him, nor change or alter the word of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, but serve this very prince designate in a true and fitting manner, speak with him in friendly terms, and do whatever is pleasing to him and what is in accordance with his command.
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me:
... Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, in the month of Duʾūzu
Yatamâ, archer of the queen mother;
... the eyes of ...
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments...
Witness Aširâ.
Dari-šarru, farmer; 5 persons; 2,000 stalks of vine; x ... ; 1 house; NN, farmer, ...
Month of Adar (XII), 12th day.
The son of Yakin ...
... the praises of ...
The lady Aya-ammu, my sister, is placing (her) daughter in (her) lap.
I have not yet got the tribute under way, but as soon as I have got it under way, I will send the king, my lord, the first installment. Let the ... s of the Palace Superintendent ... to ... with NN.
in the city of Arbela ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, (or) has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šarru-emuranni. Good health to the king, my lord!
From Nergal-eṭir.
... I gave to Bel-naṣir
4 ditto of onions, of Se'-dalâ;
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Ashur-belu-usur,
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Mannu-ki-Ninua, his sons and grandsons, shall pay 10 minas of silver. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Month of Tebet (X), 28th day, eponym year of Aššur-naṣir.
3 ditto, ditto, the front red, of the country; 1 ditto, ... ;
Witness Inurta-isse'a.
20 turtledoves.
... the fumigants
If the day reaches its normal length: a reign of long days.
... the 'outside' ...
... on the ... th day
On the day when he brings the horse, he will redeem the land. The land is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Concerning the people of Maniye whom you  took away (and) brought to Assyria, I have now given (them) back to you. You are therefore under orders to provide for these people in your charge, to give them food and drink, and to protect them in every way.
They said: "We shall go (there); we shall not stay in Nineveh." They went and entered ... , and the king's subjects who were in Nippur with them ...
I shall bring the ploughs and oxen together and cultivate seed as much as I can. Next year I shall bring the ploughs and oxen together and ... the fallow field.
Bel-aplu-iddina, son of Ṭab-riq-Ešarra, servant of Nabû-šarru-uṣur.
This is from the 'party' of the 'house.'
... very
If a planet ... in the sky: ... will take place.
The 14th day ...
NN, bodyguard of the crown prince;
... as follows:
the treaty ...
The lady Taboo, who ... , is the mistress of the lands; ... the great gods ...
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur, eunuch of the chief judge.
(As for) the son of Issar-duri, who had fled to the land of the Nabayateans after the father of the king, my lord, had gone up to the land of the Nabayateans, he saw my royal statue and came (back).
Witness Habasti, ditto.
Total, of Adad-remanni, the chief cook.
The 'station' is turned around.
... as ...
... or the ...
In the future, may a later prince, when that temple becomes dilapidated and he renovates (it), restore my inscribed name to its place. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers. May he restore my clay cone to its place.
Month of Tebet (X), 8th day, eponym year of Bel-Harran-šadû'a (650).
To the king, my lord: your servant PN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Bel and Nabû bless the king, my lord!
Temple of ...
I, Šamaš-bēla-uṣur, governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, ... who (re)settled ... , (re)built ... , (and) restored ... , ... of the god Aššur ... (and) the goddess Ištar ... (and) I inscribed my monumental inscriptions.
... Aššur-šarru-...
Yada'-la-yadi', son of NN, the scribe of the chief of trade, is saying: "I have been sent to the Palace to fetch ... "
NN, farmer, and his people.
Marduk-šumu-uṣur, Naṣiru, Tabnî,
Son of Ḫanūnu of the land Gaza, descendant of the eternal line of Bēl-ālu-iššāk, son of Adasi, king of the land Qedar, ...
the king's eunuchs ...
Abu-ila'i;
... to the presence
The money is paid completely. That ... is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
I, Ninurta-kudurrī-uṣur, governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, the chosen one, whom the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Nabû, and Marduk, ... the exalted gods, ... in the month Ulūlu (VI) ... the festival of the feast of ... the god Nabû ...
... if the king so orders, they may go, and may the king ... where ...
what ...
Concerning Nergal-šumu-iddina about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let him be watched secretly" — as long as he is outside (the territory of) the Gambulaeans, I shall do as the king, my lord, wrote to me and send him to the review.
Concerning the order that the king, my lord, gave me about the official of the  Qiprê ...
If the moon becomes visible in Tebet (X) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour Subartu; a foreigner will rule the Westland.
... with Urad-...
They take it as a loan. It shall increase by a fourth.
When the god Šamaš, the great lord, came to my side and I killed the Subarean (Assyrian) and turned his land into a mound of ruins (lit. “a mound and ruins”), at that time, (with regard to) the armory, which is in Kalḫu, that Shalmaneser (III), son of Ashurnasirpal (II), a ruler who came before me, had built, (and) which had become old, I removed its dilapidated section(s). I built (and) completed (it)
... have not done ...
... ditto, white;
2 talents, the clothing-dealers.
4 minas of silver, capital, belonging to Marduk-aplu-iddina, at the disposal of Dadî, son of Il-yada', servant of Marduk-aplu-iddina.
If a fog rolls in Shebat (XI): eclipse of the Kassites.
seal of Šamaš-... ,
Whoever seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Šumma-ilani, his sons (or) his grandsons ...
a writing-board ...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Nabû-šarru-uṣur or his master, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Šumma-ilani,
Ilu-tapputi ...
Witness (blank).
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "When the emissaries of Hubuškia come, you will give them the booty of the land of Raši" — I shall give them the booty of the land of Raši, as the king, my lord, wrote to me. But the emissaries of Hubuškia should not come into my presence; they should wait for my messenger.
May Marduk, the great lord whose command takes precedence, by his unalterable word order his decay and the dispersion of his people ... ; may he pour out his life like water, may he destroy his country, strike down his people through hunger and famine, and lead him to captivity ...
I have received the letter which you sent to me.
Concerning ... about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
On my second campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me and I marched to the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians, who since time immemorial had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors. In the high mountains, difficult terrain, I rode on horseback and had my personal chariot carried on (men’s) necks. In very rugged terrain I roamed about on foot like a wild bull.
May the king ... them.
I put to the sword the population of the city Ḫirimmu, a dangerous enemy, and I did not spare a single one. I hung their corpses on poles and placed (them) around the city. I reorganized that district (and) imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the gods of Assyria, my lords.
of Assyria ...
The king should ask the chief scribe; it is not good to exasperate the king. Let the king do as he deems best.
Witness Barruqu, ditto.
and ...
... he is ...
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
... are getting up
... the servant of the king
a house, a field, and a garden
The 17th day: at the disposal of Ṣalam-šarri-iqbi.
8 females, 5 maids,
... is well.
... of the king will come into the presence of Nabû-naṣir.
Šumma-ilu, ... ;
8 (cuts of) meat ... ;
Witness Sukkaya.
... the king, my lord, ...
Witness Aššur-šumu-uṣur.
... I exercised authority over the lands Ḫimme, Paiteru, (and) Uraṭru, the lands of the distant Medes. I annexed (them) to Assyria (and) (iii 10) placed a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over them. (As for) the city Paddiri, the city (and) fortress of the land Uraṭru that had withheld (my) tribute, I conquered (it) (and) plundered (it). I carried off its people, together with their
to ...
If at the moon's appearance its right horn becomes long, and its left horn short: the king will conquer a land not his own.
... of NN
Tabni-naplis, son of Nušku-...
Šarru-lu-dari, the ...
... all ...
An estate of 2 decares of throne land, a garden, a well and a grazing land belonging to these men —
Later on I shall write to my lord ...
Moreover, (as for) Ṣidqâ, the king of the city Ashkelon who had not bowed down to my yoke, I forcibly removed the gods of his father’s house, himself, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his brothers, (and other) offspring of his father’s house and took him to Assyria. I set a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over the city Ashkelon (and) (re)named it Kār-Bēl-mātāti. I considered the city Ashkelon as part of
I will bring the eclipse ... ; the king, my lord, should know (this).
From Balasî.
In lieu of his debts he has given his daughter to Zabdî, his creditor. That woman is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
I built a palace of breccia, alabaster, elephant ivory, ebony, boxwood, musukkannu-wood, cedar, cypress, juniper, and elammaku-wood, for my lordly residence.
... a bowl of habbur (wine)
... I am now sending to the king, my lord, five men who are in my presence, (namely) NN, the son of NN, Gahal, NN, NN, and NN — the son of Bani-NN. These are all servants of the house of the governor of Calah. I am sending them to the king, my lord, in charge of my messenger. Let the king, my lord, question them. If they are genuine, let the king, my lord, send a royal bodyguard ... to these men.
May Palil, the lord of the desert, who dwells in the city Nineveh, be my prosecutor!
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, wise prince, circumspect ruler, shepherd of the people, (and) leader of a widespread population, I:
The lady NN, who ...
The king who makes the foundation of the temple firm, the one who completes the work of the goddesses, the one who pleases their divine heart(s), (and) the one who extends their protection —
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhe.
... the son of the king ...
Adad-nerari (III), overseer, son of Šamši-Adad (V), overseer, son of Shalmaneser (III), likewise overseer.
As for Min(u)ḫimmu of the city Samsimuruna, Tu-Baʾlu of the city Sidon, Abdi-Liʾti of the city Arwad, Ūru-Milki of the city Byblos, Mitinti of the city Ashdod, (ii 55) Būdi-il of the land Bīt-Ammon, Kammūsu-nadbi of the land Moab, Aya-rāmu of the land Edom, all of the kings of the land Amurru, they brought extensive gifts
... Witness Kubabu-...
Witness Ša-la-mašê, priest of Nabû.
The palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of the universe, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of the universe; property of the city Aššur.
... and when ...
... the royal bodyguard whom the king, my lord, sent, ...
... your ... s
I am ... ing my fifth year.
(As to) the stored grain of the Nabateans of which the king, my lord, wrote me: "Send (it)!", I have sent (it) to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should know (this).
Ninurta-kudurrī-uṣur, son of Šamaš-rēša-uṣur, ditto (governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari).
I worked on the dead ones. I made the corpses of the warriors who had fallen in the battle with me like ghosts. I took their ... , ... , (and) their skin (and) made (them) dwell (as safely) as in a meadow. I fashioned (statues of) their gods and goddesses (and) erected (them) in (their) midst. I made offerings before them (the gods) and presented (them) with my gifts.
An estate of x hectares of land of ...
In the west the star of Aššur ...
If the moon at its appearance ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... of the head
Witness Zar-Issar.
in accordance with the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord, and your favorable decisions, should the subject of this query, Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, strive and plan, and send ... ? If he, having planned, sends him,
To the king, my lord: your servant Inurta-belu-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord!
... , saying: "Let the king, my lord, write me. Nabû-šezibanni ... "
Witness Sipranu, grand vizier.
to be(come) strong(er) ...
... the man from ...
Month Iyyar (II), 5th day, eponym year of ...
... the successor of Nabû-uṣur
Witness Nabû-eṭir, chief of the public works.
Abi-ram, the deputy of the village manager
18, 8, total 20 — ... ;
Witness Inurta-šumu-uṣur, scribe.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nadin-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
The palace of Adad-nārārī, king of the universe, son of Arik-dīn-ili, king of Assyria: (brick) belonging to the forecourt of the House of the labūnu.
2 black horses,
The praises of my power which I had heard from the mouth of the people ...
The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... their ... s, the staff-bearer ...
Seal of Silim-Aššur, owner of the woman being sold.
The palace of Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, son of Sennacherib, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria.
As to what you wrote: "I shall send my messenger to the Phrygian" —  send him, and let the king my lord question him. If he has indeed come  to an agreement with him, let the king my lord ask him: "Where are the men?"
Nabu-šezib, the scribe of the king, has contracted and bought it from these gentlemen for 20 shekels of silver.
... Arizâ ...
... , they have ... ed ... in the city of Til-Barsip.
6 urnutu-garments ... for the review ... ;
From Adad-šumu-uṣur.
... the governors ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ra'im-nišešu. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
The city of Aššur, the great cult center, I took in hand for renovation.
... to kill, to seize ...
Ninurta-apil-Ekur, king of the world, son of Šamaš-rēša-uṣur, king of Assyria:
2 ditto ditto ... ;
Whoever changes, ignores, or violates the agreement of Assurbanipal, great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, concerning the succession of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, (and) the accession of Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, (and) tries to exercise authority over him, or takes him away by force, or ... , or ... him, or ... by any means,
... the Hittite
40 years Ashur-nerari king of Assyria.
x, the palace personnel;
On the 21st day he may go down to the river.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
700, 700, city-wall — (governor of) Ṣimirra.
81 82 ... , 73 ... : the palace scribe ...
If the moon and sun are in balance: reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make his throne last long.
... s of the fort
200 sheep, 200 spring lambs, 200 ducks, 200 geese, 200 mesukku-birds — birds of the town Qirbit;
Let the king, my lord, send (word) to the magnates that they should ... the  temple supervisor ...
Month Tebet (X), 25th day, eponym year of Mannu-ki-Adad.
They are waiting for me ...
... huzunu, remanni-Adad the ...
... the land Ulluba, which is between the land Kaska and the land Tabal, ... the cities Amanus, Kamanu, ... the city Carchemish of the land Ḫatti, which is on the bank of the Euphrates River, ... the cities Šinuḫtu, Ḫamānu, ... the city Tuḫana, the city Tīl-karme of the land Gurgum, the city Kilambāti, the city Armiru, the city Ḫubuškia, the city ... ,
... there ... the king, my lord, ...
I had a stele made, had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, written on it, and I erected (it) on the plain of the city Ḫalulê. I had the might of the god Aššur, my lord, and my royal majesty written on it, and I displayed (it) to the people of the lands. I covered it with a coating of gold (and) made (it) shine like daylight. I conquered the city Ḫalul
Dannaya, eunuch of the queen;
The word of Aššur-šallim-ahhe, son of Rīmūt-Nabû, son of Aššur-nārārī (II), son of Aššur-rabi (II), son of Aššur-bēl-nišēšu, son of Aššur-nārārī (I), son of Aššur-rabi (I), son of Enlil-nārārī (I), son of Aššur-dān (I),
Ninurta-shezibanni,
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Eltekeh (and) Tamnâ. I approached the city Ekron and I killed the governors (and) nobles who had committed crime(s) and hung their corpses on towers around the city; I counted the citizens who had committed the criminal acts as booty; (and) I commanded that the rest of them, (those) who were not guilty of crimes or wrongdoing, (to) whom no penalty was due, be allowed to go free.
Nabû-... , ditto; Hanan, ... ;
Witness Šulmu-ahhe, royal bodyguard.
3 shekels of silver belonging to Bahianu, at the disposal of Ubru-Adad.
in all 11 ...
Witness Nanî.
The land of the chief cupbearer is well.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ululayu. The best of health to the king, my lord! Assyria is well, the temples are well, all the king's forts are well. The king, my lord, can be glad indeed.
... of the land of ...
... of the Hittite
I shall send ...
The ...
... the river ... to the land ... -ša-Aššur ... I built a city in the land ... -ša-Aššur ... (5') ... I named it Aššur-iqīša... I built inside it a temple for the god Aššur, my lord, ... I built a house for my lordly residence ...
5 mares:
He (Nabû-... ) has ... ed 100 (hectares) of the ... eans, 200 of the Arameans, 400 of the ... eans, 600 of the Akkadians, 400 of the ... eans, 800 of the Gurreans, 400 of the Itu'eans, 400 of the ... eans, 400 of the Kassites, 400 of the ... eans,
... the Enlil of the gods
I will bring the ploughs and oxen together
The king, my lord, knows that the day I arrive in the king's presence, I  shall come back here posthaste.
Witness ... -ahhe.
The city Karzitali ...
Have they really been sent by Šamaš-šumu-ukin? Are they really from the mouth of Mukin-Aššur? Has he really said to them as follows: "... from the mouth of Sin ...
Witness Nabû-šumu-iddina, scribe, keeper of the contract.
... let them settle
The ... of ...
... Nabû-ša-ṣalli, NN
... to the stronghold ...
... Esarhaddon ...
I have spoken to the king, my lord, as best as I could, and I have explained to the king, my lord, the nature of the crime of which I accused my father and my grandfather, and the nature of the crime of which I committed. The king, my lord, knows that I am a servant of the house of my lords, and that I have been devoted to the house of my lords since my childhood. I have not profited from the crime of which I committed. On the contrary, I have suffered as never before, and given up the ghost. The king, my lord, should not
before the gods ...
total — Issar-gimilli-libbi.
If the moon is surrounded by a halo, and Regulus stands in it: in that year women will give birth to male children.
The city Kušit.
seal of Sasî, owner of the man being sold.
(whether) they will kill what there is to kill, plunder what there is to plunder, and loot what there is to loot,
... I invited ... to my palace... I offered before them ... (and) fattened sheep. I held a festival and ... I had (my servants) drench their (the guests’) heads with fine oil (and) perfumed oil... I had them anointed with oil ...
(the ruler) of Moab ...
From Munnabitu.
Ulūlu (VI), twenty-fourth day, eponymy of Bēlšunu, palace overseer (648).
adjoining ...
... among the captives ...
Witness Ubru-Nabû, keeper of the tablet.
Afterwards, the Babylonians, who had gone forth with Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan) (and) had fled to (the land) Elam, brought the Elamite to Babylon and he (the king of Elam) placed Šūzubu (Nergal-ušēzib), son of Gaḫul (Gaḫal), on the royal throne over them.
To the king, my lord: your servant, the chief scribe. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord.
The following is (my) bread and fodder per calendar month: God-šarru-iškun  — 500 (homers of) fodder, 200 (homers of) bread; Šamaš-balaṭu-uṣur  — 400 (homers of) fodder, 200 (homers of) bread; Nergal-ilaya  — ... ; Ilu-ereš  — ... ; Ṣalmu-šarri-iqbi  — ... ; Sin-šallim
Witness Hiriṣayu.
The lord of kings should ... the haruspices ... ; they should look at the features and ...
... Esaggil and Babylon ...
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Zazaya,
Witness NN, the man in charge of the ditto.
owner of the ... being sold.
If at the moon's appearance its right horn becomes long, and its left horn short: the enemy's right hand will capture the enemy's left hand.
25 shekels of silver belonging to Buraqâ, at the disposal of Dayyan-Kurbail.
(Property) of Šamaš-bēla-uṣur, the ša rēši of the king.
Palace of Sennacherib, king of Assyria: (This is) the audience gift that Karib-il, king of the land Saba, presented to me. Whoever places (it) in the service of a god (or another) person (or) erases my inscribed name, may the deities Aššur, ... , Šamaš, ... , (and) Adad make his name (and) his seed disappear.
... by the Inner City
While I was in ... , Ahu-riba went to ... , saying: "Let us muster the men and go to the river bank."
an estate of 1 hectare 4 decares adjoining Marduk-ereš and Apladad-ereš;
We kept watch on the 29th day; we did not see the moon. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king my lord!
in all, 6: the 'residences' of ...
... his city will be delivered to the enemy.
At the beginning of my kingship, after the great gods appointed me to the shepherdship of the land and people, the Qutu, a dangerous enemy, rebelled against me. I prayed to the god Aššur and the great gods, my lords, and they gave me a straight answer, a firm yes. I mustered my troops (and) reached as far as the land Šubria to the land Meḫru. I defeated the extensive army of the Qutu. I carried off their booty, possessions, property, herds, (and) flocks (and
To the deity Šamaš, ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-metu-uballiṭ. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
... of the son of Yakin
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-belu-taqqin. Good health to the king, my lord!
4 minas of silver, 3 togas, 2 tunics: the Chief Singers;
The ... :
... here ...
10 ... garments ... , (with) edging ... ;
... of sissoo-wood;
Month Elul (VI), 20th day, eponym year of Mannu-ki-Aššur-le'i.
my lord wrote to me: "...
... he (the king of Elam) did not listen to ... (and) did not ... my ... He mustered his troops (and) his ... and (then) made a sworn agreement with ... , the commander of ... He divided the land ... into equal parts and assigned (them) to ...
... the town of the Muškannu
The ...
... the babylonians ...
Concerning the lapis lazuli about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "It was lying on the ground in the lap of Bel; where will they burry it?" — it is lying on the ground in the centre of the city, in the temple of Merodach-Baladan.
... we wrote
... 20 hectares ... ;
... Assyria ...
Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria: The tribute of the Aḫlamu, the people of the city Carchemish, the kings of the lands Ḫatti and Ḫanigalbat, the Sutians, and the Upper Sea
On my third campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me and I marched to the land Ḫatti. Fear of my lordly brilliance overwhelmed Lulî, the king of the city Sidon, and he fled afar into the midst of the sea and disappeared. The awesome terror of the weapon of the god Aššur, my lord, overwhelmed the cities Great Sidon, Lesser Sidon, Bīt-Zitti, Ṣarepta, Maḫalliba, Ušû, Akzibu, (and) Acco, his
Witness Šamaš-šarru-uṣur, chariot fighter.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
... to ... the man ...
Witness Aššur-...
I carried off to Assyria his palace women, his eunuchs, his battle troops, (and) the booty of his land.
The letter which Nuraya sent to the king, my lord, has been sent to me.
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial payment from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
... the moat ...
... like locusts, ... without number. They laid waste to his land, devastated his land, ... his people. They carried off as booty people, donkeys, oxen, (and) sheep and goats, ... of his land.
Let me tell you: I have not changed my mind. I still hold the king's land in good regard. I still pray to the gods for the success of the king, my lord. And I still trust in the word of the king, my lord.
4 litres of honey ...
Witness Sime-Aššur, horse trainer.
... mu
The Ru'ueans whom the king my lord sent against the rebels — I  have given them the prefects of the Ru'ueans who came, and they have  gone and entered their houses. The king, my lord, should know (this).
From Rašil the older, servant of the king.
Total, the offerings of the chief cook.
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... I gave to Bel-...
130 ... ;
“You, the divine lady of ladies, the goddess of war, the lady of battle, the advisor of the gods — her ancestors — the one who speaks good thing(s) about me before (the god) Aššur — the father who had engendered you — (so that) at the glance of his pure eyes he desired me to be king — with regard to Teumman, the king of the land Elam (v 115) who placed a burden on (the god) Aššur — the king of the gods, the father who had engendered you —
May the king, my lord, send (somebody) to inspect his condition and give orders to  have him treated. Let the king, my lord, also send (somebody) to inspect me —  I am (but) a dead dog. The king, my lord, revived me, and I shall be devoted to the king, my lord.
Month Adar (XII), 7th day, eponym year of Abi-ram (677 B.C.).
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur.
When I heard ...
A tablet of Bel-bunaya to the palace superintendent.
He shall have the usufruct of it for a number of years. He shall have the usufruct of it for 4 crop years and 4 fallow years.
The stone weighted 20 minas and 10 shekels according to the standard of Carchemish.
Concerning the news of the king of Elam, I have written to the  commander-in-chief. If he sends the messenger, I shall show him the ... in the presence of the king.
... my ... s
Tribute from the land of the people of Unqu.
It is not a fastened ...
Shalmaneser, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (I), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of Aššur:
I have appealed to the king, my lord, saying: "The king, my lord, knows that the work on ... is hard and there are no apprentices. The king should send some apprentices to me."
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, changed or altered the proceedings, or jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
The woman NN, maid of ... -šumu-ibni —
... his ... s, his ... , his advisor, ... , his ... , his battle troops, the Elamite ... , the Elamite ... , the Elamite ... , the Elamite ... , the Elamite ... , the Elamite ... , the Elamite ... , the Elamite ... , the Elamite ... , the Elamite ... , the Elamite ... , the Elamite ... , the Elamite ... , the Elamite ... , the Elamite ... , the Elamite ... , the Elamite ... , the Elamite ...
I wrote to him: "Release the man to me!" but he refused to  release him.
they are very glad ...
... their ... s
... the king ...
The governor of ... has 100 men with him; they should cross over to us and ... the  bridge to us, so we can let our boats pass (the bridge).
... they are crossing over ...
Disregard that ... they may think about it, but turn and ...
As to the Arameans about whom my lord wrote me: "Send (word) that they should be seized and brought to me!" —
Your servant Nabû-bel-šumate: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: I have sent my messenger to greet the king, the horses and the soldiers.
O king, my lord! I am a dog of the king, my lord. I have run away to the city of the king.
... of the land Ḫindānu
A tablet of Aššur-zeru-ibni to Nergal-šarru-uṣur. Good health to my brother!
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord!
x hectares of field in the village of Urad-Gula; Abbaya, farmer, and his people; Aširâ, farmer, and his people.
Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
... the king, our lord
Witness Basnî, scribe.
... the men who fled
of ...
... , saying: "I have ... ed the ... of Bel-šuma-iškun
The physician who serves him ...
Month ... , 1st day, eponym year of Sin-šarru-ibni.
(As for) the people of the land Akkad who had not fallen to my weapons, the awesome terror of the weapon of (the god) Aššur, my lord, overwhelmed them and they fled to the city Ša-pī-Bēl, a city upon which the land Akkad relied. (v 70) The soldiers of the land of the Arameans who were stationed inside it to guard (it) also fled with them. I entered that city (Ša-pī-Bēl) and slaughtered (them). I took away from them
I plundered the city Arzâ, which is in the district of the Brook of Egypt, and threw Asuḫīli, its king, into fetters and brought (him) to Assyria. I seated him (text: “them”), bound, near the citadel gate of (the city of) Nineveh along with bear(s), dog(s), and pig(s). I threw the ... of Egypt into the River Ḫusir (and) made (them) swim (in it).
in the temple ...
... me ...
It shall increase by a fourth.
May the god Nabû, the sublime son, look upon this work with pleasure and may a good word for me be set upon his lips!
May Marduk, the great lord, the Enlil of the gods, the exalted one, lord of oracles, look with joy upon my good deeds and, by his command, give to me as a gift a long life (lit. “a life of long days”), fullness of old age, good health, and happiness.
May nobody ever again raise a claim against Palil-ereš, the servant of the king, my lord, and his brothers! May the king, my lord, punish the instigator(s) of this slanderous talk! May the evil talk against them be removed from the mouth of the people! May the king, my lord, write to me (about) the matter! I shall speak to the people of my lord's household, and the king, my lord, shall hear no more ugly talk about them!
Your servant Ina-tešî-eṭir: I would gladly die for the king of the lands, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Concerning the eunuch ...
... has ... ed against you
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
At that time, I had a stele bearing my name made and I engraved image(s) of the great gods, my lords, on it (and) placed before them an image of my royal majesty beseeching their divinity. I had the praise of the god Marduk, my lord, and my good deeds inscribed upon it and I left (it) for ever after for the kings, my descendants.
I have been informed as follows: "The ... is departing on the xth day ...
... them to ...
to ...
I shall send the rest of the ...
... is the ... of Nabû-šezibanni.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Zabayu or his sons or his brothers or his nephews,
Witness Nabû-rehtu-uṣur, ...
For the goddess Inanna, lady of the lands, his lady: Esarhaddon, king of Assyria (and) king of Babylon, had baked bricks made anew for Esagil and Etemenanki.
... ,
Witness NN, scribe.
As to Aššur-bessunu the servant of the king, my lord, who ...
To the king, my lord: your servant, the chief tailor. Good health to the king, my lord. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord.
I ... to your ...
Total, 51 — the town of Til-Barsip.
... s, 3 ...
I shall send ...
To the governor, my brother: your sister, Urzana. Good health to my brother!
... I gave ...
... Now they are casting a ... stone in the agate-standard.
Witness NN, scribe.
In the future, in far-off days, may a future ruler, one of the kings, my descendants, renovate its dilapidated section(s) when that temple becomes old and dilapidated. May he find an inscribed object bearing my name, anoint (it) with oil, make an offering, (and) return (it) to its place. The god Nabû will (then) hear his prayers.
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
May Aššur, the king of the gods, who decrees the fates, decree an evil and unpleasant fate for you. May he not grant you long-lasting old age and the attainment of extreme old age.
(As for) Aplāya, the son of Nabû-salim, ... and Nabû-šuma-iškun, the šandabakku (governor of Nippur), Lulî, the city ruler of ... , they, together with the kings of the land Ḫilakku, ...
... to the city ...
In the future may a later prince, when that temple becomes dilapidated and he restores (it), restore my monumental inscriptions and inscribed name to their places. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
in accordance with the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord, and your favorable decisions, should the subject of this query, Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, strive and plan, and send the army, as he wishes, with Nabû-šarru-uṣur, chief eunuch, against the enemy troops which have now set up camp in the district of Gambulu?
... s in the ... gate
... the king, my lord
... I wrote him
If a snake keeps scaring (people) in a temple: anger of the god.
... the king, my lord ...
to NN ...
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
Witness NN, son of Hanî.
... the land Missi, the land ... , the land Mannea, the land ... , the land Andia, the land Zikirtu, the land ... , the land ... , the land ... , the land ... , the land ... , the land ... , the land ... , the land ... , the land ... , the land ... , the land ... , the land ... , the land ... , the land ... , the land ... , the land ... , the land ... , the land ... , the land ... , the land ... , the land ... , the land ... , the land ... , the land ... , the
1, the commander-in-chief of the left ... ;
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Witness Kenu-balaṭ, ditto.
I received as tribute the city Ḫarḫar, which is on the border of the land Sūḫu, (along with) its surrounding villages and the district of the land Bīt-Ḫumria (Israel).
Ashur-ilaya,
cure of ...
1 ditto of budê-confection;
... of field in the town of Šarru-nuri
They have brought it to a standstill.
Witness Aššur-le'i, ...
Nergal-ila'i, chief ... ;
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, wise prince, circumspect ruler, shepherd of the people, (and) leader of a widespread population, I:
... "I will not release the bonds of the gates! I will  not give the keys to the gatekeepers!
saying: "Why did you send ... to the king, my lord? ... "
For the goddess Nanāya, august lady, who dwells in Eḫiliana (“House, Luxuriance of Heaven”), which is inside Eanna, the supreme lady, his lady: Sargon (II), king of the world, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer (and) Akkad, shepherd of the land of Assyria, had baked bricks made (and) made the processional way of Eḫiliana shine like daylight.
Your servant Nabû-ušallim: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
Month Ab (V), 3rd day, eponym year of Sin-šarru-uṣur.
Witness ... -zeru-iddina, palace manager.
5 cans of beer;
The gods Ninurta and Nergal, who love my priesthood, gave to me the wild beasts and commanded me to hunt. I killed 30 elephants from my ... chariot with my wildly vigorous assault with the spear. I slew 200 strong lions like caged birds with the spear. I killed 100 ostriches like caged birds with the spear. I killed 100 strong bulls with my wildly vigorous assault with the spear. I killed 100 wild bulls with my wildly vig
Let the king, my lord, send a bodyguard with me to fetch them.
At that time the temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, my mistress, which Šamšī-Adad (III), king of Assyria, son of Išme-Dagan (II) (who was) also king of Assyria, had previously built, (after) 721 years had passed it had become dilapidated and I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I rebuilt (it) from top to bottom (and) completed (it). I made (it) greater than before. As an addition I constructed the
... of the city of Kannu', a tanner of coloured leather, ... , a man of the city of Qirbit.
... of the ... -Aššur
... 22 persons, the emissaries of ... , are bringing to Arbela.
Witness Remanni-Adad, ditto.
from Dur-Šarruken ... the king
3 ditto of chick-peas;
Concerning Aššur-deni-amur ...
Witness Nergal-šarru-uṣur, 'third man.'
... is at home.
The palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, great king, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dān (II) (who was) also king of the universe (and) king of Assyria.
I have given out the provisions for a whole month, by the seah of 8 'litres'.
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed. The judge shall not heed his case.
Bel-na'id, the son of the šandabakku (governor of Nippur), whom the king, my lord, promoted to the position of šandabakku, has gathered a following among the citizens of Nippur and is saying to the king, my lord: "The citizens of Nippur who are loyal to me should be rewarded." I am now writing to the king, my lord, that the citizens of Nippur who are loyal to Bel-na'id should not be rewarded, but that the house of Nippur should be given to Bel-na'
The ... of the 'ear' is present. The 'cap' rides upon the 'outside.' The base of the middle part is 'loose.' The breast-bone is thick...
before the gods ...
Now then I am sending him to the presence of the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, question him.
3 ... ;
In the top of the right surface of the 'finger' there is a 'weapon'-mark which faces the top of the 'finger.'
1, ditto of the chief confectioner;
The old man did not know the young (people).
Yasubaya, a man of the 'Left' House, has ... ed the ... of the Chaldean(s).
The king, my lord, said: "The troops of the Urarṭian have been defeated on (their) expedition against the Cimmerians." How would I not be shaken up (by this), (when) the enemy has defeated my own troops!
Witness Pan-Issar-lamur.
... the deaf ...
The temple of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, which Ilu-šumma, a king of the past (lit. “a king of the past”) who preceded me had built — that temple had become dilapidated and I cleared away its debris. I changed its site. As an addition, I built the room of the šaḫuru and the towers. I built (everything) from top to bottom. I deposited my monumental inscriptions and clay inscriptions.
Witness Nabû-eriba, deputy team-commander.
You shall not give Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, a deadly drug to eat or to drink, nor anoint him with it, nor practice witchcraft against him, nor make gods and goddesses angry with him, nor change nor alter the word of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, but serve this very prince designate whom Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, has presented to you, and he will exercise the kingship and lordship of Assyria over you
Anu, Antu, Adad, Šala, Ea, Damkina, Ninurta, Nusku, Mandanu, Nergal, Ištar of Nineveh, Ištar of Arbela, the Assyrian Enlil (and) the Assyrian Ištar, the Great Gods, the Narudi, the Weapon, Amurru, Haya:
The potion which is placed before the divine judges in Kurbail is the potion of the king's sceptre. When the king ... , his sceptre will be extended.
From this day, the 10th day of this month, the month ... of this year, to the 29th day of Sivan (III) of this year, 30 days and nights, my stipulated term —
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, ...
Witness Batulu, servant of ...
which he/they ... to/for ...
Written according to the original and collated.
... of the men who were impaled on the terrace
... s and gold ...
An estate of 100 (hectares of) land in the town of ...
The rest of the tribute I received from Nabû-šuma-iškun, the ... of the city Ḫararatu: silver, gold, (and) precious stones.
... I did not let (my) army rest ... I fought with them ... I brought about their defeat. I blocked up the Ulāya River with their corpses (and) filled the plain of the city Susa with their bodies like baltu-plant(s) and ašāgu-plant(s).
The 11th day: at court, favorable.
Ashur-nirka-da''in.
If he does not give his girl, he shall increase the silver by 1/2 shekel (and) pay it.
Month ... , xth day, eponym year of Mannu-ki-... , commander-in-chief of Que.
81 cedar roof-beams, 330 cypress roof-beams, 105 daprānu-juniper roof-beams, all fixed;
3 2-seah jars of hinhinu-seeds;
his sons ...
... as the king ...
Month of Shebat (XI), 1st day, eponym year of Ašaredu.
1 ... -garment, felted, the edging red, of the country.
... the one who performs the work of the goddesses ...
... his ... and his city ...
Should Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, appoint the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the position which is written in this papyrus?
Witness Nabû-šumu-iddina.
I put to the sword the population of the city Ḫirimmu, a dangerous enemy, and I did not spare a single one. I hung their corpses on poles and placed (them) around the city. I reorganized that district (and) imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the gods of Assyria, my lords.
I have given the order to release the ropes, they will release them on the 1st of Tishri (VII).
... to
The 18th day.
The barley has not been piled up; they are still bringing it in.
... to the land Ḫatti ... the chieftains of the land Ḫatti ... the king, my lord, sent me. I went and made a treaty with them in the land Ḫatti. I put the king my lord's seal on the treaty document and imposed it upon them. Afterwards the king of the land Elam invaded the land Ḫatti (and) captured the cities of the land Ḫatti. The treaty which I had made with them in the presence of the god Marduk
Pulu,
... ;
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
... adjoining the river Saniti, ...
... vegetable garden ...
These are the ones who have not yet paid ... :
... is set to ...
I have brought across the river 1,300 sheep and 1,100 cattle. Aššur-remanni the chief cook has come down to me, saying: "The king has exempted the other side (of the river) for me."
Nabû-... is saying ...
May Palil, the lord of the desert, consume him who sits on the throne of the land of the Arabs.
total 4 ... ;
... in my presence ...
adjoining the field of Ša-Aššur-dubbu,
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. The best of health to the king, my lord!
The palace herald enters, kisses the ground before the king, and stands with the standard opposite the king.
(As for) the land Ulluba, a region of the land Mannea that Ursâ (Rusâ) had annexed and appropriated for himself, (iv 55) I tore the land apart from within. I carried off to Assyria ... , his advisor, together with his property (and) his fighting men, (as well as) the people of the land Ulluba who were guilty of crimes (and) hanging (their) heads on poles. I reorganized that land (and) imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of
Now ...
9 female Corybantes;
As to the carpenters about whom the king, my lord, wrote me: "Send (word) that 10 carpenters should come to my presence" — I have sent them to the king, my lord.
To the king, my lord: your servant, NN. Good health to the king, my lord!
... will say ...
2 homers of roasted grain.
The governor of Arrapha has seized a city of mine, and all the people of the city have been brought into fortified places. Even the king's tax-collection point ...
shall place x minas of refined silver and x minas of pure gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, shall tie two white horses at the feet of Aššur, and shall bring four harbakannu horses at the feet of Nergal. He shall return the money tenfold to its owner. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
35 homers of wine, the chief cook;
of 1,230 ...
1 mina, Nabû-... ;
40, the single-column tablet(s),
The king knows that my men are working in the environs of the king; they come and go, but the king's men do not allow them to enter their ... s, nor do they allow them to enter their ... s.
To the vizier, my lord: your servant Nabû-zeru-lešir. Good health to my lord!
Witness Ilumma-le'i.
5 sheep, 5 spring lambs, offered to Aššur, belonging to Birtayu.
... The 'path' is present...
... the 'weapon'-mark of the 'increment' ...
The charge of the 'Lady of Cults' is doing very well; the king, my lord, can be glad indeed. May the god Nabû and the goddess Tašmetu bless the king, my lord!
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-beli-ka''in. Good health to the king, my lord!
Arzezu,
or in ... ,
Witness Zababa-eriba, 'third man.'
in front of ...
... I sent ... to the king, my lord; the king, my lord ...
Aššur ...
... the front ...
NN, farmer, ... ; 1 son, ... ; 2 women;
... care of Ṣalam-sarri-iqbi.
... the month Sivan (III) ...
... in their presence
... the governor(s)
... their ... s ...
We have no bread to eat and no water to drink.
... the goddess Erua
... the Ru’ua are not present
... of Nabû-šezib, the ...
Nabû-... is in the presence of Aššur-... ; I have sent my messenger to greet him. The ... s of the king, my lord, are well.
When the king, my lord, ... , the town of Til-šikari was affected along with the whole district.
... this
... to the Babylonians
1 ditto of fish;
As to what the king wrote to us: "... the barnyard
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, then I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, fortified cities, together with the small(er) settlements (ii 15') in their environs (and) the district of the land Bīt-Barrû in its entirety, and
Town of Nineveh
If a planet stands in the east: the king of the east will rule the world.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
... big ... s
... a long time
... the land of Arbela
x ... of ... , 1 1/4 mina, ditto;
a cup of ... ;
... to the king, my lord ...
... Iau-bi'dî
10 shekels of silver belonging to Ahu'a-amur, at the disposal of Nadinu.
NN, reporter.
Month “Opening of the Door,” eponymy of Atar-ili, governor of the land Laḫīru (673 BC).
10 minas of silver ... ;
... I gave ... as a gift ... the god Nabû ...
... the office of the chief ... is not compatible with his office as governor of ...
... the king, my lord, ...
Witness Haldi-ahu-uṣur, horse trainer of the royal bodyguard.
Your servant Sama', the 'house' and the people of Sa'eru,  Kuzurakki and Barzundi ...
The covering of the roof that (hangs) over the corridors — I made their somber atmosphere cheerful, making (them) as bright as day. I decorated them with silver and copper knobbed nails. I adorned the arches, friezes, and all of their copings with baked bricks (glazed in the color of) obsidian (and) lapis lazuli.
... Yasubu, Nabû-ahu-...
which on ... ,
... is in the charge of the people of the city of Tillê; the king does not ... about it. The ... s ...
for a month ...
... he is a good man
I made foundation inscriptions, had the might of the god Aššur, my lord, (and) the deeds that I had done written on them, and I placed (them) in the foundations (and) left (them) for ever after.
The flag ...
From Nabû-iqbi.
... , Ṭab-belu-uṣur, a total of 10 men,
... of Humbê ...
NN, his servant —
Witness Aššur-le'i, 'third man.'
Issar-... ,
Total, 10 (items): a throne of ebony, a footstool of ebony, a chair of ebony, a cupbearer's (pot)stand of ebony, a ... -stand of ebony, (and) a stand of boxwood, all of them Aššur-dur-paniya.
Ilu-eriba;
... Se'-abu...
The woman Aya-ammu, wife of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, gardener; a son of 4 spans, 1 woman, 1 daughter, weaned: a total of 4 people.
That which is (written) on the throne at the footstool of the god Marduk.
a writing-board ...
... the second (size)...
... the king, my lord
... , 1 ditto, the front red, of the country;
... the ... who ... the ... of his land ... son of ...
1 male sheep, of the meal ... ;
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
The king should not listen to the lies of ...
Sapiku, king of the land ... ,
Kaštaritu, city lord of Karkaššî, who has sent his messengers to Nabû-šuma-iškun the ... , saying: "Let us stand together, mobilize an army and go to wage war against the Elamite" —
... temple ...
At the beginning of my kingship, in my first year, when the god Aššur, my lord, entrusted me to rule over the land of the Qutu, I sent my army to the land of the Qutu, to the land Ḫabḫu, (and) to the land of the Šubaru. I annexed to Assyria the lands of the Qutu, the land Ḫabḫu, (and) the land of the Šubaru. I placed a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over them.
On the ... th day Nergal went ... The rest of the day I spent in the palace of the king, my lord; I did not go near the river bank. The king, my lord, should know (this).
... seah of  8 'litres'
In the midst of that battle, I captured alive the Egyptian charioteers and princes (lit. “the sons of the king”), together with the charioteers of the king of the land Meluḫḫa. (v 80) The latter, seeing the decapitated heads of their brothers, lost their senses. They flew (back) to their own land(s) like birds, ... their ...
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
The one who crushed the Barnaki, a dangerous enemy, who live in the city Tīl-Ašurri, which is called Pitānu in the language of the people of the city Miḫrānu;
I and ...
I sent him the following order: "As soon as the king of Elam has been defeated, and the garrisons of the king of Assyria have been dismantled, you shall set out and come to me."
(whether) it is acceptable to the king, my lord.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
... the king, my lord, ...
I have written to the city of ...
... I carried off ... his ... I carried off ... his ... his wives, his sons, his daughters, his ... , his possessions, his property, ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... , his ... ,
... the treaty
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did you not arrest him and hand him over to the royal bodyguard?" I went after him (the fugitive), but could not catch up with him; (the terrain) was too difficult, it was not fit either for horses or for chariots. I sent my brother Nabû-šumu-iddina to help me, but he could not catch up with him either; the terrain was too difficult for both of us.
... are keeping watch over him.
In the middle surface of the 'finger' a 'weapon'-mark is present. The left of the 'finger' is split.
x minas of silver of Aššur-iddina, chief of the trade.
May any future ruler, one of the kings, my descendants, whom the god Aššur and the goddess Ištar nominate for ruling over the land and people, renovate its dilapidated section(s) when this palace becomes old and dilapidated. May he find an inscribed object bearing my name, anoint (it) with oil, make an offering, (and) return (it) to its place. The god Aššur and the goddess Ištar will (then) hear his prayers.
Witness Nabû-šumu-iškun, chariot driver.
... I sent him ...
The hub of the wheel of the chariot is turned towards the front of the wheel. The 'strength' is present. The 'path' on the left of the gall bladder is present. There are 4 fissures, the lower ones are ...
in all 588 horses trained to the yoke.
The palace of Amēl-Marduk, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, son of Nebuchadnezzar (II), king of Babylon.
Assurbanipal, the crown prince of the Succession Palace, who is now ill, and on whom the 'hand' of god ... is being 'placed' in extispicy —
If a cloudbank lies in the path of the sun: the king will widen his understanding.
The commander-in-chief has also given orders to the prefects: "Each of you shall have the usufruct of a boat for the use of your district." But the boats of the Inner City are all assigned to the boatmen of Aššur. How are we to manage the boats of the Inner City? Should we seize (them)?
I have given you ... ; ...
14 ... ;
Nabû-šar-ahhešu;
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, scribe.
... my brother was killed. The Chaldean troops who had come to the aid of the Babylonians, the troops of ... and the troops of the king of Elam ... (ii 5') marched about triumphantly in the city of Bubilu.
Now, if the king, my lord, commands, I shall go to the river bank; otherwise, I shall do as the king, my lord, orders.
Ikūnum, vice-regent of Aššur, for his life and the well-being of his city
8 'litres', ... ;
The Urarṭian has crossed over to me (from the other side of the river). I asked him about the Urarṭian, and he told me: "The ... has been completely crossed over."
(all) that was done ...
Moreover, I struck with the sword Teušpa, a Cimmerian, a barbarian whose home is remote, together with his entire army, in the territory of the land Ḫubušna, a district of the land Kummuḫu. I imposed upon him a heavy tribute, 10 talents of gold, 500 talents of silver, (and) 1,000 talents of bronze.
The palace of Aššur-...
I opened up a foundation pit for the outer wall, Badnigerimḫuluḫa, (which means) “Terrorizer of Enemies,” then I dug down forty-five nindanu and made (it) reach the water table. I bound together strong mountain stone in the water below and above I expertly carried out its construction with large limestone (blocks) up to its copings. I enlarged the structure of the palace to 700 large cubits along (its) longer side and 440 large cubits along (its) shorter side and (thus)
Concerning the news of the enemy, ... has said: "The son of Yakin has been killed; the city of Lahiru is in rebellion; the prefect of the land of the Manneans has been killed."
To the king, my lord: your servant Adad-šumu-uṣur. Good health to  the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
At that time, (with regard to) the city Sūru, which is inside (Mount) Ḫukkuruna (lit. “the city Ḫukkuruna”), (15) the people living there used to answer each other yes (for) no (and) seldom spoke the truth. They put their hands on the possessions of the citizens of Sūru (and) sold the gold, silver, (and) precious stones at market value to the land Elam. They plundered the citizens of Sūru who had saved themselves (from destruction)
Izzia,
... the ... of the king ...
Witness Mannu-ki-Ninua, ...
... now
If the moon and sun are in balance: reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether these men or their sons or their grandsons or their brothers or any relative of theirs, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Ribate,
Witness Nabû-šallimšunu.
a writing-board ...
(As for) him, Ummanigaš, the king of the land Elam, along with the king of Babylon (and) the sheikhs of Chaldea who marched at his side, terror of doing battle with me overwhelmed them like alû-demons. They abandoned their tents and, in order to save their lives, they trampled the corpses of their troops as they pushed on.
from the town of ... , near ...
On account of this the goddess Ištar of Arbela, who loves my priestly service, ... in her steadfast heart  (i' 5') said to me ... the enemy who ... , who does not fear ... , who ... , who does not respect ... , who ... , (and) who speaks evil word(s) ... against me ... she sent me her fierce arrow, which cannot be matched, ... to overthrow my enemies ...
On the 27th day the king goes down to the House of God.
If the moon is surrounded by a halo, and Scorpius stands in it: entu-priestesses will be made pregnant.
To the king of the lands, my lord: your servant Bel-iddina. May Bel, Nabû and Šamaš bless the king, my lord!
... Marduk-šumu-uṣur from ...
... of happiness ...
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
The messenger of the city-lord of ... has come to me, saying: "The magnates of the house of ... are coming to the palace."
scribe, keeper of the tablet.
... will go
The palace of Aššur-rēša-iši, designate of the god Anu, whose priesthood is pleasing to the god Aššur (and) the great gods, (and) whose deeds the god Aššur has ordered, (whose) scepter the god Aššur has grasped, (and) whose weapons the god Aššur has sharpened, so that he may slay his enemies,
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Total 71,000 (homers) wheat in the town of Til-abnâ.
Disregard that the day is overcast and it has rained...
the men ...
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
... Ištar ...
Nabû-šarru-uṣur has written to ...
Seal of Nabû-ahhe-šallim, son of Nabû-zeru-lešir, owner of the vineyard being sold.
If Venus becomes visible in Nisan (I) at an inappropriate time: the king of Akkad will fall in battle ...
If in Tebet (X) the moon becomes visible on the 28th day: the Ahlamû will devour Subartu; a foreigner will rule the Westland.
... I wrote him
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
(and) a letter from Iddin-ahhe, a servant of ...
Anu and Antu, the Great Gods, the Narudi, Nusku, Šala, Ea-šarru, Damkina, Usumû, Kittu, Mišaru, Šakkan:
Ninuayu,
200 (hectares) of sown land.
Witness NN.
former ...
... the lord of ...
... gardener; 1 woman; 1 daughter, of 4 spans' height; ...
If on the 14th day the moon and sun are seen together: the speech of the land will become reliable; the land will become happy; the king will become happy; the cattle of Akkad will lie in the steppe undisturbed.
Ashur-la-kenu-ubasha,
An estate of 1 decare of field in ...
... his people
The moon will complete the day on the day that it is seen together with the sun.
10 hectares, the town of ... ;
Sa'ilu, his servant —
... of field in the town of Uqimutaya —
— Jupiter stands in the halo of the moon.
From Bulluṭu.
Kanunayu, servant of the king, in the household of Ašipâ.
... saw ...
with ...
In the future, in far-off days, may one of the kings, my descendants, whom the god Aššur and the goddess Ištar nominate for ruling over the land and people, renovate its dilapidated section(s) when this ... becomes old and dilapidated.
... , ... -nadin-apli, Amat-Ba'al, ...
1 ... , the front red, of the port, not;
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, changed or altered the proceedings, or jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters, chosen of Aššur, vice-regent of Aššur, faithful shepherd, loved one of the goddess Ištar, subduer of the land of the Qutu in their entirety including the land of the Šubaru, Lullumu, and Ḫabḫu as far as the land Meḫru, subduer of the land of the Papḫu as far as the land Akkad,
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also great king, strong king, king of the world, (and) king of Assyria; valiant man who acts with the support of Aššur, his lord, and has no rival among the princes of the four quarters, marvelous she
... whose kings, my ancestors, used to regularly receive the tribute of the kings of the lands within the sea (and) the land Ḫatti (Syria-Palestine), (and) who used to bring their gifts to Aššur, my lord; (but) not one among them had conceived of and put his mind towards building a magnificent palace, ... or increasing the site of the city, ...
Town of Bet-Ea-šarru — Ilu-remanni
... ṣi, his wife, ... ri, his son,
The commander-of-fifty and the chariot driver shall stand by the chariot.
the 2nd day, the 4th day ... are good days for ...
Month Tammuz (IV), 22nd day, eponym year of Ilu-isse'a.
Month ... , 8th day, eponym year of Aššur-bani (713 B.C.).
in all 78 ... men ...
The Ukkean has written to me: "The son of Yakin has gone to the Mannean border, to guard the border. The Ukkean and the Tabalean have crossed the border and gone to the town Zabanu, to guard the border. The Ukkean says: 'If the son of Yakin falls into their hands, they will take him to the Mannean border and hand him over.'"
her witnesses, including the witnesses of the earlier case,
The 'third men' of the palace (personnel) are leaving (their) posts and going to the country of the chief cupbearer; the city-overseers and the city-guards are also leaving their posts and going to the city of the chief cupbearer.
In the morning may he apprise you of good, in the evening may he inform you of evil.
... I said: "Lay down ... !
1, the woman Aya-qamu, his sister;
I shall do ...
... his ... to his ...
The servants of the king ... to the governor ...
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, have jumbled the oracle query in my mouth, or changed (or) altered the proceedings...
... said, saying: "...
... the rear part
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ahhe-eriba. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
1 ... -garment ... ;
... :
The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Siṣṣû, the deputy of the palace herald, has given (the following order) to ... , the cook of the crown prince: "Make the bread for the crown prince!"
Witness Tabalayu. Witness Urdu-Nanaya.
... the 7th day, the 8th day, ...
O Aššur, father of the gods, ... , creator of everything, ... , the one who molds the Igīgū and Anunnakū gods, ... , the one who fashioned the physique of my royal majesty, ... , look upon my good deeds with pleasure and speak well of me — Esarhaddon, ... , the king who reveres you!
To the king, my lord: your servant Šarru-emuranni. Good health to the king, my lord!
... the commandant
Basnî ...
and the servitude of Ku...
Witness NN.
... the dead ones ... the king, my lord
Witness Ibašši-ilu.
... of the sheep
of the king, my lord, ...
Uardî, ditto; 1 son of 4 spans' height; 1 woman; 1 daughter, weaned: a total of 6 people.
(As for) Necho, Šarru-lū-dāri, (and) Pa-qruru, kings who had exercised dominion over Egypt (and) the land Meluḫḫa after one another (x 10') (and) whom I had made bow down to my yoke through the might of (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar, my lords, (and) had handed over to do obeisance to me — the kings of the land Judah, the house of my lords, (x 15')
The king should posthaste send the garments to me. I shall deliver them to the king, my lord, personally. The king, my lord, should know (this).
I sent my eunuchs and my provincial governors against them. They conquered the city Thebes within a day. Horses, mules, oxen, and sheep and goats, which were without number, they carried off to Assyria. They shattered the city Thebes (and) Heliopolis (and) broke their necks.
... three ...
Etušmes, “House of the Lady of the lands”: the house of Belat-ekalli.
Concerning Šarru-emuranni about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let him come and receive the horses from the commandant!" —
20 hectares of arable land, 10 hectares under cultivation therein.
... mules of the town Birani
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord!
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "... to the Inner City
... is in charge of ...
... who go out to the fields
May Ea, king of the Abyss, lord of the springs, give you deadly water to drink, and fill you with dropsy.
... to their places ...
Concerning the king my lord's servant Pulu, whom the king my lord sent to me, saying: "Give him 500 men" — I gave him 600 men, but the men of the house of the palace herald and the recruitment officers of the palace herald are withholding his men from him, so he has no men at his disposal. The king my lord should know this.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the governorship of Nergal-apil-kumu'a ...
of the palace of the king ...
Adad-nerari (III),
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
From Rašil the older, servant of the king.
All this is of the nature of the observation of the planet Mercury.
Total 100 (women) — (governor of) Nineveh.
until ...
... the ... of the king
The enemy is ...
... a silver ring, on a ... ,
... to the king, my lord.
From Balasî.
... to the king
... to my feet
1 writing-board ...
I sent a herald ...
When the temple of Amurru, the great god, my lord, which Šamšī-Adad, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Išme-Dagan (II) (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur, had built, (this temple) had become dilapidated and I rebuilt it from top to bottom. I deposited my monumental inscription.
... they do not bring ... , nor do they transport the beams to the river bank, nor ... do they glaze bricks for the king.
the men of Na...
... the king should not ... my report ...
... he has established ... for the house of ...
The lower part is elevated ...
The Chariot, the Weapon, Amurru, Aššur of Reading;
When the chief eunuch of the king of Elam came to ... , I said to him: "You and the troops of the king of Elam ...
... the 'increment' is normal...
I wrote to you: "Give the servants of Aššur and the servants of the chief cupbearer their houses in the city of Issete," and you gave them (the houses).
(But) as for me, Sennacherib, king of Assyria, the foremost of all rulers, expert in every type of work, regarding large columns of copper (and) striding lion colossi, which none of the kings of the past (who came) before me had cast: With the ingenious mind that the prince, the god Ninšiku, had granted to me (and) taking counsel with myself, I intensively pondered how to perform this work. Then, with my (own) ideas and knowledge, I created a cast work of copper and expertly carried out its
Witness Aššur-reṣuwa, chief porter of the palace.
... me, the maid of theirs
... As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Make the ... bigger ... !
... you ...
of ...
Witness Šamaš-šarru-hattu.
To the god Aššur, his lord: Sargon (II), presented (this object).
and Nabû-šezib ...
Nabû-šezibanni, a citizen of Borsippa, a reliable informer
The second messenger whom I ...
May the king, my lord, send (somebody) to come and tell me what my orders are. Without (such) orders, I cannot do the work.
... the estate of ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
The king, my lord, should not ... me! I am a dog of the house of the palace superintendent. The king, my lord, should not ... me!
A tablet of Parruṭu to Nabû-... , his lord. Good health to the crown prince, my lord! The city of Der and the fort are well.
He said: "Nabû-aplu-iddina ...
NN, farmer, and his people; ... hi-ba'al, farmer, and his people.
Witness Šamaš-šumu-iddina, cohort commander.
Marduk-apla-iddina ...
... the eunuchs of the crown prince
Witness Abba'u, ...
I had a palace of elephant ivory, ebony, boxwood, musukkannu-wood, cedar, cypress, juniper, and terebinth, (a palace that I named) Egalzagdinutukua (“The Palace Without a Rival”), constructed thereon as my royal residence.
The money is paid completely. That vineyard and grove are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Month Tishri (VII), ... th day, eponym year of Nabû-ahu-uṣur (649).
Bel-ereš and Kutî have taken it as a loan.
As to what you wrote me: "I have built a house and made my family and my friends enter there" — may the great gods of heaven and earth who dwell in this city of yours, Šaššu, bless you!
Witness Aplî.
The priest of Aššur circumambulated the House. The king made the chanters rise.
Witness Paršidu, village manager.
I have written to my brother ...
As to the seed corn about which the king, my lord, wrote me: "Why has ... much seed corn been left ... ?" — Zarpanitu  ... seed corn ... this ...
... the Aramean(s)
all the Babylonians ...
... Let the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
10 ... ;
... to the land of the Guti ...
... the men
Ditto by Ištar of Nineveh and Ištar of Arbela!
In the future, may one of the sons, grandsons, (great grand)sons, or (great, great grand)sons, one of the kings, my descendants, whom the god Aššur and the goddess Ištar nominate for ruling over the land and people, renovate its dilapidated section(s) when this House of Succession becomes old and dilapidated.
Witness Nabû-ahu-uṣur, royal bodyguard.
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
I have sent my messenger to the city lords; as soon as they bring me the news, I shall write to the king, my lord.
If the sun rises and (is as if) dyed red: the land will see plenty ...
Witness Nuhšaya, porter.
1 four-leafed vegetable, of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh;
... the Mannean ...
A ... of ... , a citizen of Nineveh, a servant of the governor of ...
2 ditto ditto ... ;
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
As to what you wrote me: "I have heard that the king of Babylon is very ill and that the son of Yakin is taking care of him. If the son of Yakin comes to Babylon, will he take you with him to Babylon? Or will he let you go to Assyria?" — the king of Babylon is very well; the son of Yakin is also very well. As to the son of Yakin coming to Babylon, let him come; there is no need to stop him. As to whether he will take you with him to Babylon, there is
(As for) Nabû-naʾid (and) Bēl-ēṭir, sons of Nabû-šuma-ēreš, the šandabakku (governor of Nippur), whose father, the one who had engendered them, had stirred up Urtaku to fight with the land Akkad — the bones of Nabû-šuma-ēreš, which they had taken out of the land Gambulu to Assyria, I made them (lit. “his sons”) crush those bones opposite the Citadel Gate of Nine
Bel-iqišanni,
Witness NN. Witness Barruqu.
I drove the servant women of his land before my army ...
Witness Ququ.
all to ...
... to the merchant ...
In Shebat (XI), the 1st day, eponym year of Sin-šumu-lešir.
All this from an Assyrian woman.
those who ...
The people of the country have not been gathered together.
The king mounts the rikshaw ...
A tablet of Sagab to the palace scribe, his lord.
I have written to you. Let me quickly see an answer to my letter! ...
Nabû-gamil,
Written according to the original and collated.
Total 23 horses,
Month Ab (V), 18th day, eponym year of ...
The moment that the king my lord set out, I sent (word) to  Aššur-belu-ka''in, the ... of Nergal, to bring (the statue of) the ...
... the men of the Itu'eans ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-šumu-ka''in, the  commander-in-chief. Good health to the king, my lord!
If the breast-bone is blunted: confusion, rebellion.
You shall not do (anything) that is evil and improper to Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, (nor) to his sons, (who are) your lords, (including) assassinating him, nor set any other king or any other lord over you, nor swear an oath to any other king or any other lord. You shall not do (anything) that is not good and proper to Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, (including) seizing
I have set out from Kurbail and am coming to the king, my lord.
1 ditto of grapes; a ditto of olives;
In the month Aššur-bēl-kala, the festival of the king of the gods, the god Aššur, I marched to the land Ḫanigalbat. I conquered the city ... I carried off ... ,  together with their possessions, the property of the palace, the ... of the king of the land Ḫanigalbat.
... , ...
... in this manner
The king, my lord, knows that I am very ill indeed. If I were not ill, I would have come to the king, my lord. Now I have (finally) come.
the corn tax ...
Let the king, my lord, send a bodyguard to ask him ...
Nabû-šumu-iddina, scribe, deputy team-commander;
The name of the other one is Kakka. The name of the first one is Nergal.
... who in his fiveness
... the gate of ...
I sent ...
... they are not ...
... who
Concerning the 6 persons about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me
I had a stele made and had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, written on it.
I plundered the Aḫlamû-Arameans from the edge of the  land Sūḫu to the city Carchemish of the land Ḫatti in a single day. I crossed the Euphrates after them in rafts (made of inflated) goatskins. I conquered six of their cities at the foot of Mount Bešri. I brought their booty, possessions, and goods to my city Aššur.
Witness Nabû-šumu-iddina, mayor.
The money is paid completely. That land is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Witness ... , ... of the city of Nineveh.
... the great gods in their places
If the Fish star comes close to the top of the moon and stands there: the king will live for many days; there will be peace and reconciliation in the land.
... wooden ...
their ears ...
... Aššur-šarru-uṣur
To the king, my lord: your servant Mannu-ki-Adad. Good health to the king, my lord!
... is not good ...
Concerning Bel-naṣir about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let him be watched ... " —
Witness NN, 'third man'.
The king installed the governors and they have been exercising the kingship over the country ever since last year. Now, during the past five months, they have been inciting the country to rebel against the king, my lord, and, in addition, they have been instigating the country to seize the road to Babylon.
(Ditto, ditto;) just as a worm eats ... , so may the worm eat, while you are (still) alive, your own flesh and the flesh of your wives, your sons and your daughters.
to the king, my lord, ...
... , x persons; NN, ...
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Sagab (651).
the district ...
seal of Šarru-... ,
Nabû-balassu-iqbi
... the day
When I previously reported to the king, my lord, that the canal was blocked, the king my lord ordered: "Dig an additional canal!"
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... the Deas
The architect...
1, Nergal-... , ... ;
... Belet-balaṭi ...
One litre of honey, 1 litre of oil by the copper seah of 10 'litres' belonging to Aššur-zeru-ibni, at the disposal of Ša-la-mašê, the vizier's son.
For the god Enlil, king of the gods, sovereign of heaven and netherworld, prince (who decides) the fates, his lord: Ashurbanipal, his obedient shepherd, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, (re)built Ekur, his beloved temple, with baked bricks.
... the land of Ruṣapu ... which is in the district of the land Ḫindānu.
Disregard that ... an evil eye ...
... the temple of the god Adad
Your servant NN, the governor of Nippur: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! May Enlil, Ninurta and Nusku bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
If the moon becomes visible in Sivan (III) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
Witness Nabû-naṣir, horse trainer of the palace.
The baker and the brewer have the usufruct of the intestines.
Samsī-iškun, son of ... ri, a Chaldean, a person of lowly status, whom I had raised up and appointed to the office of ... , who ... , was struck by a lightning bolt and ...
The evil Šuma-iddin, who did not fear my lordship (and) abandoned the gods, plotted with the king of Babylon (and) the king of the land Elam to divide up the land Akkad among the ... The people of Akkad, (... ) who had grasped the feet of my royal majesty, (... ) ... to the land Elam ... They spoke treachery (and) decided on a profitless decision... Šuma-iddin ...
If the moon and sun are in opposition: the king of the land will widen his understanding.
To the king, my lord: Your servant Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
... the ... -official of the chamberlain, the palace supervisor and ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
I have heard that the palace of ... has been completely built and plastered, (but) the ... has not been installed.
The forts of the king, my lord, are well.
... the fortress of ...
Remuttu ... , ... of the king;
Witness Šumma-ilani.
1 prayer bowl ditto;
Moreover, (as for) Ṣidqâ, the king of the city Ashkelon who had not bowed down to my yoke, I forcibly removed the gods of his father’s house, himself, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his brothers, (and other) offspring of his father’s house and took him to Assyria.
... is ... to the mankind
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
The palace of Šamšī-Adad, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (III), king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), (who was) also king of Assyria: booty of the city Ellipu of the land Ḫatti. As for the one who removes my inscription (and) my name, may Aššur, my lord, overthrow his sovereignty.
I have now sent him to the Palace. He is a very able scribe, useful to the king, my lord.
5 talents, Review Palace of Calah;
I appointed over them Bēl-ibni, a son of a rab banî (and) a scion of Šuanna (Babylon), who had grown up like a young puppy in my palace, as king of the land of Sumer and Akkad.
1 ... of Nabû-ahhe-šallim, chief of the accounts of Kummuh.
Month Iyyar (II), 10th day, eponym year of Manzarnê, governor of Lahiru.
(As for) the Cimmerians, a dangerous enemy who had never feared my ancestors, and, with regard to me, had not grasped the feet of my royal majesty, (ii 10') with the support of the gods Aššur, Bēl (Marduk), and Nabû, the great gods, my lords, he (Gyges) clamped (them) in manacles, handcuffs, (and) neck-stocks and sent (them) before me, together with his substantial audience gift(s).
On my third campaign, I marched against Baʾalu, the king of the land Tyre who resides in the middle of the sea. Because he did not honor my royal command(s and) did not obey the pronouncement(s) from my lip(s), I set up outposts against him. To prevent his people from leaving, I reinforced (its) garrison. By sea and dry land, I took control of (all of) his routes (and thus) cut off (all) access to him. (ii 15') I made water (and) food for the preserv
... will make it go out.
Month of the god Sin, eponymy of Šamaš-napišti-Adad.
Witness Bel-abu'a.
NN, ... of the queen, has contracted and bought it for x minas of silver ...
7 big loaves;
I have seized the city of Aššur-mudammiq, their fortified city, together with 100 of their villages.
The king of Elam heard about the conquest of his cities and fear fell upon him. He brought (the people of) the rest of his cities into fortresses. He abandoned the city Madaktu, his royal city, and set out for the city Ḫaydala, which is in the mountains.
At that time the temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, my mistress, which Ilu-šumma, my forefather, the prince, had previously built — that temple had become dilapidated and I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I changed its site. As an addition I constructed the room of the šaḫuru and the towers. I built (and) completed that temple from top to bottom. I built within it a lofty dais (and) an awesome sanctuary for the abode of the goddess Ištar, my
... the Babylonians ...
The singer intones, “My father’s house is distant.” The king steps down from the dais and goes to the house of Adad.
Salamannu,
What you ...
Witness NN, royal bodyguard.
to the command of the god ...
... Nergal-... , ... of the king ...
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur, eunuch.
Let the king send word to NN that he should bring ... The king, my lord, should ask ... whether ... to me ...
The weapons of the lord of the lands ...
Adad-apla-iddina, king of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, prince who reveres him, the one who pleases the heart of the god Marduk, the one who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, am I —
The king should send (word) that they should bring the boats to me.
The bow in his hand and the arrow in his quiver are the emblems of Aššur, the emblems of Šamaš, the emblems of Adad, the ... of Ninurta and Nergal.
... (and) I marched ... (5') ... of the land Nairi ... I carried off ... their ... (and) their property without number. I ... the troops of the land Nairi ... I annexed to Assyria (and) placed a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over them.
Witness ... a, ...
In the future may a later prince, when that temple becomes dilapidated and he restores (it), restore my monumental inscriptions and inscribed name to their places. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
Ana-Nabû-taklak.
Concerning the crown prince about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let him come and stay with me" — if it pleases the king, my lord, let him come and stay with me; otherwise let him  (stay) in his own country. I am but a dog of the king, and the king, my lord, has been kind to me.
Šulmanu-... , ... ;
The apprentice Ningišzida-ukin, servant of Sîn-tabni-uṣur, governor of the land of Akkad, is placed as a pledge at the disposal of Šamaš-šumu-ukin, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, in lieu of 1/2 mina of silver.
(As for) the one who alters my inscribed object (and) disrespects my words, may the god Aššur, my lord, overthrow his sovereignty. May he destroy his name (and) his seed from the land. May the goddess Ištar, my mistress, bring about the defeat of his land. May he not stand firm before his enemy. May the god Adad strike his land with terrible lightning (and) afflict his land with want.
Seal of Nabû-riba-ahhe, scribe.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
May the name of the great divine lady, the goddess Ištar, ...
... in the charge of Nabû-le'i, the sartinnu
2,000 ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let the statues of the king be erected in Assyria and in Elam!" —
A ditto of olives;
The chariot which goes to the Dais of Destinies and comes back has no driver. Without a driver it rocks about.
Mannu-ki-...
the servant of theirs ...
... he shall set up ... There shall be no ...
... his ...
Seal of Ana-kaša-atkal,
To the king, my lord: your servant, Ahhešaya. Good health to the king, my lord!
... you, O my god, ...
Ullusunu, the Mannean,
... the son of Anu
The king gives 400 loaves of bread, 400 flagons of oil, 400 flagons of honey, 400 flagons of lentils, 400 flagons of chick-peas, 400 flagons of ordinary lentils, 400 flagons of lentils of the country, 400 flagons of ordinary sesame, 400 flagons of kernels, 400 flagons of budê-confection.
You are the true seed of Aššur-dān, who with his just scepter drove out the evil doer and destroyed the name and seed of the house of Sennacherib; you are the creation of the goddess Ištar, who put the evil away from you and raised you up to the kingship to avenge the land of Akkad; the god Nergal, the strongest one of the gods, gave you the power to destroy the land of your enemy; the goddess Ninlil, the spouse of the god Enlil, elevated you to the kingship
Mannu-ki-Arbail, ... , and his scribe, along with ... and the son of NN ...
Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, viceroy of Ur, built anew the Gipāru, the house of the supreme goddess, beloved wife of the god Sîn.
The palace of Aššur-bēl-kala, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Tiglath-pileser (I), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (I) (who was) also vice-regent of the god Aššur:
... the king, my lord
Witness Kinaya.
Witness-Abu, palace farmer of the queen.
A tablet of ... -ereš to the king, his lord. Good health to the king, my lord!
If the top of the 'finger' is atrophied:
Month Nisan (I), eponym year of Ša-Nabû-šû.
... they have promoted ...
Now, the king, my lord, should not say: "He is a traitor!" I have never in my life heard him utter an evil word against the king, my lord, or make an insurrection against the king, my lord. He is a servant of the king, my lord, who has devoted himself to the king, my lord.
Witness NN.
20 sheaves — Nabû-zeru-lešir
Witness ... -Nabû.
Concerning the matter of the planet ... about which the king, our lord, wrote to us: "What is it? Is it an omen? Write me!" — it is not an omen. It is written in the (cosmic) literature as follows:
The news of the son of Yakin: he has left Harihumba and  gone to Nineveh.
... of the goddess Ištar of Arbela
1 seah 1 'litre' of spiced bread; a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
... to the men
... , Enuma Anu Enlil,
The palace of Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, king of the world (and) king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of the world (and) king of Assyria; the one who (re)constructed the temple of the god Aššur, (re)built Esagil and Babylon, restored the rites, (and) returned the plundered gods of the lands to
... years
... the palace overseer
Disregard what they speak with their mouths, or what they are thinking...
... to Nabû'a
Let them write to me what the king my lord's orders are.
The chief of the extensive army, the general of the vast troops, the capable, the expert, the leader of a widespread population, the one who directs all of the rulers, the one who controls all of the lands, the hero, the warrior, the virile, the foremost of all rulers, the one who is resplendent in battle and combat, the ferocious, the furious, the one who overwhelms all of the lands, the one who breaks up the forces of the rebellious, the one who defeats his enemies,
An estate of 1 hectare ... , well ... —
... appointed ...
... after the king had asked ...
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
Bel and Nabû ...
If a meteor flashes from east to west ... : the main army of the enemy will fall.
An estate of 4 decares of field on the side road of the goddess Išhara;
May Nabû (and) Marduk bless the king, my lord! May Aššur,  Šamaš, Bel and Nabû give happiness and physical well-being to the king, my lord!
Witness Mannu-ki-Adad, royal bodyguard.
The 'well-being' is destroyed. The 'path' is curled. The 'strength' is present. The 'base of the throne' is present. The 'weapon'-mark of the 'increment' rises towards the left. The 'left' 'increment' is normal...
Bel-kenu-uṣur,
(As for) the one who changes (an inscription) written in my name, defaces my representations, annuls the privileged status of Babylon, (and) breaks the covenant of the lord of lords, may the god Aššur, the great lord, the god Adad, the canal inspector of heaven and underworld, the god Marduk, the lord of all, the god Nabû, the scribe of the gods, the god Nergal, the perfect one, (and) the goddess Ninlil, the spouse of the god Enlil,
If the moon becomes visible on the 30th day: frost.
... Urdu and the men with him ...
... Will they remain loyal to Esarhaddon, king of Assyria? Will they remain loyal to Assurbanipal, the crown prince of the Succession Palace?
Witness Šarru-kenu.
The troops of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, have entered the city Quhna, a fortress of Mugallu the Melidean. The king, my lord, can be glad.
I will not ... and not ...
I shall bring the first shipment that arrives from the land of the Chief Cupbearer.
May they (= all the gods) make your words evil, may they (= all the gods) make your speech evil, may they (= all the gods) make your thoughts evil, may they (= all the gods) make your actions evil.
Witness Zarutî, chariot driver of the crown prince.
... my ...
Witness Sin-zeru-ibni, ...
Fingernail of Marduk-eriba, owner of the garden, house, land, and people being sold.
... heard ...
If Scorpius is black: the king will carry radiance. Radiance is light.
This is the account of the expedition that I took to the land Ḫatti. Fear of my lordly brilliance overwhelmed Lulî, the king of the city Sidon, and he fled afar into the midst of the sea and disappeared. The awesome terror of the weapon of the god Aššur, my lord, overwhelmed the cities Great Sidon, Lesser Sidon, Bīt-Zitti, Ṣarepta, Maḫalliba, Ušû, Akzibu, (and) Acco, his fortified cities (and) fortresses, an
I will ...
... chariot-horse-trainer(s);
... the presence of the goddess Ištar ...
in all 4 hectares of land in the town of Til-mati, in the farmland of the town of Saṣu.
Does your great divinity know it? Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Witness Ilumma-le'i, cohort commander.
... of his ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who ... , the one who
If the earth quakes all day: dispersal of the land.
The 'station' is present. The 'path' ... on the left ...
sent ...
... who ...
... Babylon
of Nabû-bel-šumati ...
The city-lords around them are also bringing their tribute to the king. Some of them have come to me personally, saying: "Our people have been sold for silver." I have sent (word) and they have been returned from the merchant's house.
(As for) Ḫanūnu of the city Gaza, he heard about the advance of my expeditionary force (while he was) inside the city Memphis, and (then) he fled to the city Thebes. The kings, governors, (and) officials whom I had stationed in Egypt came to meet me and kissed my feet.
... x hectares of field in the village of Ṣi... ,
From Zakir.
Shalmaneser, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also king of the universe and king of Assyria:
Witness NN.
At that time I made the enemy people whom I had captured carry baskets (of earth) and they made bricks. I cut down canebrakes in Chaldea and I had their splendid reeds hauled (to Nineveh) for its (the palace’s) construction by enemy soldiers whom I had defeated. I had the triumph of the god Aššur, my lord, (ii 5') written on (the bricks and) I deposited (them) in its foundation(s).
... Aššur-ilaya,
Witness Puṭi-Aya.
500 sheep, 500 spring lambs, 200 ducks, 200 geese,
If the moon becomes visible on the 30th day: there will be frost, variant: rumor of the enemy.
Witness Marduk-aplu-iddina, son of ...
Bel-na'id, son of NN, servant of NN, says: "I have ... ed the land of the Lullumu ...
x+16 amulets of ivory;
Month Adar (XII), 10th day, eponym year of Mar-larim.
We set out on the 18th day and are coming (now), (but) the ... of the king, our lord, has detained us in the palace. What are the king's orders?
adjoining ...
... the temple of Nanaya
or Mukin-zeri or ...
Witness Riba-ilu.
Ditto by all the gods of Arbela!
In the eponymy of Adad-īyaʾ (Cyaxares), I marched a second time to the land Ḫanigalbat. I conquered the city Ḫadabitu, together with its district. I received the payment of the land Ḫanigalbat (and) the city Ḫadabitu (and) ... of Cyaxares, the ... of the land Ḫanigalbat, before my troops (... ).
6 ... ,
... the gods on the left ...
... he is ...
adjoining the field of Nabû-duru-uṣur,
Of one ox: the stomach, liver, kidneys, and heart. Of the sheep of the temple of Aššur.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. Good health to the king, my lord!
If in the month of your moon's appearance one horn meets the other: the flood will come.
What have they given to me?
To the king, my lord: your servant Nergal-šumu-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
from the town of Daduru ...
If a planet stands in the north: business of the land will diminish.
When the god Enlil, the lord of the lands, entrusted to me the kingship of the land of Sumer and Akkad, I was constantly assiduous about (showing) devotion to his divinity (and) I was speaking daily about doing what(ever) is pleasing to him. Every month, without ceasing, I was bringing to him pure sacrifices from the sheep of my fold.
1 ditto, ditto, edging ditto, knotted, red;
In the eponymy of Šarru-nūrāni (712 B.C.), I marched a second time to the land Ḫanigalbat. I captured the city Ḫuzirina, the fortified city of the land Ḫanigalbat. I marched to the source of the Tigris, the place where the water comes out.
The ... of the sheep is ... The ... of the sheep is ... The ... of the sheep is ... The 'station' is present. The 'path' is present. The 'strength' is present. The 'well-being' is present. The 'path' on the left of the gall bladder is present...
... to ...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the man whose name is written in this papyrus and whom Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, has taken into his entourage,
of Su...
Scholars of the king.
If the earth quakes at night: worry for the land, variant: abandonment of the land.
At that time, (with regard to) the enclosure wall of Ezida (“True House”) which had become old and whose foundation had become weak, during my reign I renovated its dilapidated sections and made its foundation as firm as a mountain. I built (it) from top to bottom and deposited my monumental inscription.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... a mountain
(As for) the Cimmerians, a dangerous enemy who had never feared my ancestors, and, with regard to me, had not grasped the feet of my royal majesty, (iii 30') with the support of (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar, my lords, he (Gyges) clamped (them) in manacles, handcuffs, (and) neck-stocks and sent (them) before me, together with his substantial audience gift(s). I constantly saw the might of the gods Aššur and Išt
... the magnates
(It is) in the hands of Nabû-zeru-iddina, mayor of Borsippa.
Your servant Aqar-Bel-lumur: I would gladly die for the king of the lands, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: I have sent my messenger to greet the king of the lands, the horses and the soldiers.
Witness Ašipâ.
I have heard it being reported of the king of Arzizi: "The Arzizi has fallen ill and is going to the city of Aššur." If this is true, and if the Arzizi really is going to the city of Aššur, then let all the troops of Bit-Kari and the whole of the Arrapheans who are with him also go to the city of Aššur; they should keep watch over there and not leave it.
Witness Nabû-ahu-uṣur, scribe.
Concerning the cure of the ears about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "They should be cured by the 20th of Shebat (XI)!" —
2 houses in Nineveh, 1 in Calah, belonging to Nabû'a and belonging to Aššur-na'id —
The 'well-being' is overturned. The top of the gall bladder is split.
Total 4 Kushite horses,
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-alik-pani. Good health to the king, my lord!
He has been sent to the governor of Calah; the governor of ...
If Adad thunders on the day of disappearance of the moon: the harvest ...
Month Adar (XII), 22nd day, eponym year of Dananu, commander-in-chief.
The bakers take 10 homers of barley and 3 homers of wheat. The brewers take 11 homers of barley and 2 homers of wheat. The boatmen take 4  homers of barley and 2 homers of wheat. The gardeners take 10  homers of barley and 2 homers of wheat. The palace personnel take 12  homers of barley and 4 homers of wheat. The cupbearers take 6 seahs of barley and 2 seahs of wheat.
In all 5 persons, an estate of 3 decares of field and a house in Nineveh —
You shall not give Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, a deadly drug to eat or to drink, nor anoint him with it, nor practice witchcraft against him, nor make gods and goddesses angry with him.
May they strangle you, your women, your brothers and your sons ... with a cord.
Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
I roared loudly like a storm (and) thundered like the god Adad against all of the troops of the wicked enemies. By the command of the god Aššur, the great lord, my lord, I blew like the onset of a severe storm against the enemy on (their) flanks and front lines. With the weapons of the god Aššur, my lord, and my fierce battle array, I turned them back and made them retreat.
10 shekels of silver belonging to NN, at the disposal of Abi-...
The royal scribe shall have the usufruct of the tablets and the written documents of the House of Aššur for as many days as he is appointed to the service of the House of Aššur.
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
... -ili,
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial payment from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
until the ... s come.
... of ...
The breast-bone is thick. First extispicy...
11 shekels of ... -silver;
The sons of the king, my lord, should stay in my presence.
in all x; 1 house.
1 ...
If the moon does not wait for the sun but sets: raging of lions and wolves.
1 cow of silver;
They are making ... like this in the country of Mannea: "The son of Yakin ...
x ... -sheep, of the meal of the pilgrims.
... I annexed to Assyria the lands Bīt-Ḫumria (Israel), Bīt-Ḫalupê (Gaza), Bīt-Yakīn, (and) Bīt-Amukāni (Bīt-Ammon), the city Ḫararatu, (and) the lands Bīt-Dakkūri (and) Bīt-Aḫlam, which are on the shore of the Sea of the Setting Sun. I placed a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over them
Like a fierce wild bull, with my select bodyguard and my merciless combat troops, I took the lead of them (the soldiers in my camp). I proceeded through the gorges of the streams, the outflows of the mountains, (and) rugged slopes in (my) chair. (iv 30) Where it was too difficult for (my) chair, I leapt forward on my (own) two feet like a mountain goat. I ascended the highest peaks against them. Where my knees became tired, I sat down upon the mountain rock and drank cold water from a water
Let me enlarge my family, gather my relatives, (and) extend my progeny so that they branch out widely; let him (the god Marduk) make the foundation of the throne of my priestly office be as secure as a great mountain; let my reign endure as long as heaven and earth; let me stride beaming daily in joy, gladness, happiness, shining face, (and) happy mood; (and) let a happy fate, a good fate, (one) for the lengthening of the days of my reign, the protection of the throne of my priestly office,
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
2 minas, of Nabû-pašir, the goldsmith.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
the woman Sukkaya, 3 sons of hers,
Instead of their seals they impressed their fingernails.
The heart of the ram is normal. Check-up...
The god Aššur, father of the gods, made all of the black-headed (people) bow down to my yoke (and) elevated me for shepherding the land and people. He gave me (the ability) to create, build, (and) renew, (and) to all of the lands (and) the (full) extent of the sky, (and) he put in my hand a just scepter that widens the land.
Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, who is now ill and on whom the 'hand' of god Nanaya of Uruk is being placed in extispicy, (whom) your great divinity knows —
in the midst of ...
Abi-hari, reporter.
ditto, the chief of accounts;
... Qibi-Bel ...
My brother, I am well, you can be glad.
... Month Adar (XII), 22nd day, eponym year of NN.
The 16th day, which they call the Silence: they cast Qingu and ...
... he did not release ...
Šumma-Aššur has contracted and bought them for 30 shekels of silver.
... the king, my lord, ...
In the evening he will come back.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
I have sent you my messenger. As soon as he returns to me, I shall write to the king, my lord.
... s, ditto;
The maid whom the king, my lord, sent to me, saying: "Let her stay with you, until I ... " — her servants went with her, so I took her in and gave her ... , (but) her servants ...
... they should go
(When) the king occupies the stand, two bull colossi carrying the divine emblem are brought in. The priest puts the emblem on the king’s head. The singer intones, “Hurrah, hurrah!” The king steps upon the stand. He puts his foot upon the stand. The singer intones, “Awesome prince, lord of the lands.”
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... Arraphaeans ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
NN has contracted and bought (said property) from Šulmu-... for ...
NN, ... has contracted and bought (said property) from NN, ... , for 20 shekels of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
To the king, my lord: your servant Issar-nadin-apli, the foreman of the collegium of ten scribes of Arbela. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
699 ... ,
Witness Nabû-...
Aššur-da''in-šarru, NN, NN,
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
4 ... -garments of linen, ... ;
If he does not pay, it shall increase by a fourth.
8 wooden ... s ... for ... ;
... of the staff-bearer
This (omen) is from the series.
Concerning the news of the Philistines, in the time of your father the Philistines used to plunder the countryside of Judah. Now they are plundering again. I have sent word, and (as soon as) they have been caught, I shall write to you (again).
As soon as I heard that ... was ... , I wrote to the king as follows: "The king should wait for me, I shall do the king's work." Now, having heard that the king is angry with me, I have become afraid, and (so) I am not doing the king's work. What is it that the king commands?
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: good for Akkad, bad for Elam and the Westland.
Month of Ṣippu, ... th day, eponymy of NN, governor of ...
... to my father ...
... is curled. The 'weapon'-mark of the 'increment' rises towards the left...
... of the 'path' is present...
... of the house of the crown prince,
in the mouth of ...
Witness Kenu-...
... the Ru'ua who
In Sivan (III) on the 1st day Jupiter stood where the sun shines forth; it was bright and its features were red, its rising was as perfect as the rising of the sun: angry gods will be reconciled with the land; the king will become happy; there will be copious rains (and) regular floods in the land; the harvest of the land will prosper; the king will reach the highest rank; the cattle of the land will lie in the steppe undisturbed.
... a man from Arrapha
They should act according to ...
... of the meal
I was worried, afraid, (and) hesitant about renovating that temple. In the diviner’s bowl, (iv 30) the gods Šamaš and Adad answered me with a firm ‘yes’ and they had (their response) concerning the (re)building of that temple (and) the renovation of its chapel written on a liver.
Witness Mannu-ki-Arbail, son of Ṣidqi-Aya.
Aya-yada' who ...
Nabû-šumu-iddina from Nineveh;
I decorated Emašmaš (and) Egašankalama with silver (and) gold, (and) filled (them) with splendor.
Afterwards, Teumman, the (very) image of a gallû-demon, sat on the throne of Urtaku. He constantly sought out evil (ways) to kill the children of Urtaku (and) the children of Ummanaldašu (Ḫumban-ḫaltaš II), the brother of Urtaku. Ummanigaš, Ummanappa, (and) Tammarītu — the sons of Urtaku, the king of the land Elam — Kudurru (and) Parrû — the sons of Ummanaldaš
Witness Imbî.
Ashur-nerari (V),
4 sheep ... ;
... s, 1 seah of sesame,
The Babylonians opened the gate and let Nabû-naṣir and his ... in. They have not as yet opened the gate for me. I am waiting for them right now ...
I have sent (word) to release the cedar roof-beams, but they have not been released ...
I have heard that the city of Akkad has been completely surrounded by a wall. The king should ask the messengers from Nippur and Babylon whether it is true.
Witness NN, ša šēpi guard.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
Ashurnasirpal, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also king of Assyria:
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
Witness Aššur-šallim. Witness Kenî, baker.
... bi ...
They (my troops) advanced (and) march­ed from the other side of the Lower Zab, the city Arbela, the city Kinalīa, the city Ḫardišpu, the city Anat of the district of the land Sūḫu, the city Dūr-Yakīn, the city Kār-Aššur, the city Kār-Mullissu, the city Kār-Aššur-mātāti, the city Kār-Aššur-lāmur, the city
The 26th day: joy of heart.
... before ...
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhe, conscript.
... are present. The 'path' is present.
In my rage, I unleashed a fierce assault on Cutha, and (then) I slaughtered the warriors surrounding its wall like sheep and took possession of the city. I killed the governors who had committed crime(s) and hung their corpses on towers around the city; I counted the citizens who had committed the criminal acts as booty; (and) I commanded that the rest of them, (those) who were not guilty of crimes or wrongdoing, (to) whom no penalty was due, be allowed to go free.
Witness Sangû-...
Five minas of silver by (the mina) of the merchant, belonging to Nabû-šarru-uṣur, at the disposal of Nabû-šezib, son of Nabû-šumu-iddina, (and) at the disposal of Balassu, (and) belonging to the harem manageress.
Total, the ... of the ... of the town of ...
Mannu-ki-Aššur, of the courtier(s).
6 bags of (mixed) kernels.
Nergal-apil-kumua,
Tablet of Aššur-killanni, the bodyguard.
Nabû-ušabši ...
Total of the men from Ubru-Nabû.
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver, or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Ša-Nabû-šû, his son (and) his grandson,
(As for) the people of the land Arzâ, a region of the land Mannea that Urtaku, the king of the land Elam, had annexed and appropriated for himself, I took away (that region) from him and gave (it) back to the people of the land Mannea... I placed ... eunuchs of mine as provincial governors over them... (rev. 10) I had a stele made, had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over them written on it, and I erected (it) in (that) city... on the
Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria: Maniye, the king of the city Ukku, became frightened by my battle array, abandoned the city Ukku, a city upon which he relied, and fled far away. (As for) the population living inside it, who had flown away like birds to the peak of a rugged mountain, I pursued them and defeated them on the peak of (that) mountain. I burned the city Ukku, his royal city, with fire. I laid waste to the land of the city Ukku (and)
Total: 3 (men), 1 woman, 1 baby, 1 ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Duri-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord!
Ninurta-ilaya,
... Calah ...
... the city god
... to them ...
Ešuddegeštuku, “House of the king’s protection”: the house of Belat-ekalli.
I, the goddess Ištar of Agade, looked with pleasure upon the work of the god Ninurta, the son of the god Enlil, the one who constructed the temple of the god Nergal, my beloved brother. I blessed him, decreed a good fate to him, (and) proclaimed that he would attain old age. I put in his hands the scepter of kingship (and) the staff of shepherdship so that he might shepherd the people forever. I gave him as a gift to the god Nergal, my lord, the best of
Concerning what the king wrote to me: "Ilu-pija-uṣur the  shepherd about whom you wrote to me — is there something wrong (with him)?  Let him come and settle (the matter) in the presence of the crown prince!" —
... the chariot of the goddess Ištar
I am writing to you right now: as long as I am here, do whatever you can do, and do it quickly! And when I come, do not leave the matters of this letter of mine to your own devices! Let them do what I told you to do!
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of all the four quarters, chosen of the gods Enlil and Ninurta, whom the gods Anu and Dagan, the great gods, my lords, allowed to grasp the hand of the god Aššur, their lord, and (who) thereby made the foundation of the throne of his priestly office firm, so that (he may) shepherd the people of the world in a just manner, to organize well the rites and ordinances of the temples,
1 female donkey-driver ... ;
... we did
I have appropriated for myself the servants of the king, my lord, who are in my  presence, those who have come to Nineveh and those who have been sold for money  in the city ... ; I shall distribute the (remaining) people (among) my  troops.
with ...
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 21st day, eponym year of Dadî, treasurer.
When I sent my messenger to the Philistine, the Philistine detained the messenger of mine whom I had sent to greet him, and did not give a reply to my word(s). And (when) I sent (another) messenger of mine to the Philistine, he took him into custody and sent him to Aššur-iddina, the king of Assyria.
... the goddess Tašmētu, the goddess Nanāya, ... the goddess Ištar ... who goes before me, the goddess Queen-of-Nippur, the goddess Zarpanītu, the goddess Anunitu, the goddess Uṣur-amāssa, the goddess Bēlet-ilī, the goddess Kittu, the goddess Šarrat-nipḫi, the goddess Šarrat-kidmuri, the goddess Šarrat-nipḫi-... , the goddess
The priest of Aššur circumambulates the House and the temples. He offers hand-water to Aššur, strews salt, and says thus: “Aššur and Mullissu, Adad (and) Mašmaš, the gods of the House of Aššur, accept life!” He strews salt on the terrace before Aššur, strews salt on the terrace before the gods of heaven, strews salt on the terrace before the gods of earth, strews salt on the terrace before the gods of the under
The charge of the rear palace is well. The king, my lord, can be glad.
Witness Ubru-Nabû, ...
Kakkullanu, single; Mannu-ki-Adda, single; Tukulti-Ninurta, single;
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
Witness Bel-na'id,
1 ... -cloth, 1 bowl (of wine), 1 ditto of oil, 1 ditto of honey, 6 sheep, 6 bowls (of wine): the overseer of the household.
The king, my lord, will say:
2, NN, chief ... ;
... on the ... th day
... the servant of Nabû-ahhe-eriba, the merchant, was arrested in Nineveh and handed over to the vizier. The vizier sent him to Nabû-ahhe-eriba, saying: "Set out and go! Let the merchants settle your accounts with one another!" The merchant gave the man back the money he owed him. The vizier seized the man (again), saying: "He is a debtor; I shall give him to you. Go, pay your debts to Nabû-ahhe-eriba!"
Aššur-bani, the ... of the Palace Superintendent, has said to me: "The men who were given to me have not been put in order. The king's order should therefore be given to me, so that I can settle (the matter)." I am now sending the men to the Palace. Let the king, my lord, settle (the matter) between them.
If Adad thunders in the month of Tebet (X): there will be famine in the land.
The moment that the sun set, I sent the first contingent of 300 horses of the palace (and) the second contingent of 300 horses of the commander-in-chief after it. They went up to the pass of the goddess Ištar and stayed there,  waiting for the king my lord's caravan.
The palace of Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria.
Concerning NN about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... "
The chief ... of the town of GN
... to make (those) planted areas luxuriant, I cut with iron picks a canal straight through mountain and valley, from the border of the city Kisiru to the plain of Nineveh... On that canal, I caused an inexhaustible supply of water to flow...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
just as ...
I took the city Elenzaš as a royal city and a fortress for that district, then I changed its former name and
1,000 (homers) of barley belonging to the harem manageress of the queen mother, at the disposal of Šulmu-beli, servant of ...
a long ...
I sought and the ... of the ziggurrat of the god Adad, my lord, I found. I removed the sandy soil. I built (and) completed the ziggurrat from its foundations to its crenellations. I deposited my monumental inscriptions and clay inscriptions.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
... of the 'cap' (rides) over the 'outside.'
Month of Kuzallu, tenth day, eponymy of Erība-Adad, chief cook of the god Aššur (712 B.C.).
Witness Munnabitu, scribe.
... are making common cause with him.
The king, my lord, should ask the scribes of the palace who have (already) come, how many are (left) at their disposal.
to ...
The plundered of the goddess Ištar of ...
x minas of silver, one talent of silver, belonging to Buraqâ, at the disposal of Nabû-na'id.
Witness Šulmu-beli-lamur, from Calah.
and when he ran away,
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether, (should) Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, send the messenger of his choice to go to Hubuškia to conclude a treaty with him,
100 bundles of reeds, each bundle more than a donkey can carry, must be at hand in Dur-Šarruken by the 1st of Kislev (IX).
... the town of Hallu...
... king of the world, king of Assyria, who ... the great gods ... who ... to renew ...
We have sent ... to NN and to ... , (but) they have not agreed ...
... huzūnu-garments, felted, the palace ... ;
If at the sun's rising a cloudbank lies to its right: the flood will come.
... , 1 vineyard, 1 vegetable garden in Nineveh;
The god Aššur, king of the gods, looked steadfastly upon me among all of the rulers and he made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
Witness Adad-naṣir. A total of 10 witnesses from Ispallurê.
... I am writing to you
10 minas of silver, 10 togas, 5 tunics, 1 potful of iced fish, 1 creel of 100 fish, all tribute: the Grand Vizier;
He took it as a loan. It shall increase by a fourth.
... Witness Inurta-šarru-uṣur.
... to the guard
If the moon is surrounded by a black halo: the man will die, variant: there will be deaths.
Witness Nabû-šezib.
... nâ ...
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
x+8 big loaves, 1 seah 9 'litres' of spiced bread;
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, ditto.
... s to ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
The money is paid completely. That ... is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
the man ...
Concerning the ... about which you wrote, it is good that you wrote and informed me.
... they are transporting ... to them.
... the lower part is elevated ...
The city Ṣibur, (part of) the district of the city Ashkelon.
... Nabû in the bouillon;
Should Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, appoint the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the position which is written in this papyrus?
In my eighth regnal year, after I had marched to the land Ḫanigalbat (and) conquered the lands Ḫanigalbat, the city Arpad, (and) the land Hamath, I received a substantial payment from the distant Medes, of whose land none of the kings, my ancestors, had heard mention. (Thus) I made them bow down to the yoke of my lordship. (As for) Tarḫu-lara of the land Marqasa, who had not bowed down to the yoke of my lordship
Zeru-ukin, son of Rukibtu;
The people living in the cities of the lands Ḫatti and Aram, whom from the days of yore none of the kings, my ancestors, had known about, and whose number, like (that of) sheep, the gods of the heavens had decreed, saw ... in the distant past. The kings, my ancestors, never crossed the boundary of Assyria nor did they have any contact with the people of the lands Ḫatti and Aram.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the scribe of the king's brother. Good health to the king, my lord!
... I did not give
... is not saying ... about the Mannean. He has been kept in my presence ever since he ran away to my country; I have taken him into my entourage ...
The chief singer has come and said: "I am to entertain (the king) for  ten days in Nineveh." What is it that the king, my lord, commands?
does not agree ...
they will bring the horses and come.
I will kill ...
Five days ago I wrote to Nabû-šezibanni: "Let them  bring the equipment for the solar eclipse," and he promptly brought it.  Now Adad-šumu-uṣur has come and said: "Remove the equipment for the solar eclipse!"
... who in the future ... will restore the ruins (and) return my inscribed name to its place. (Then) the god Aššur ... will listen to his prayers.
x+4 persons ... ;
a ditto of quinces;
... The middle of the 'path' is effaced. The 'strength' is present. The 'well-being' is present. The 'path' on the left of the gall bladder is present. The 'finger' is thick. The lower part ...
... his ... to him
3 1-year-old ewes:
Mars, the star of the Westland, is bright and clothed in brilliance; it has reached Cancer, but has not yet entered it. The king, my lord, should know (this). It will stay in Cancer for a month of days; after that it will go out (and) drop in brilliance.
the archers ...
9 sheep, the house of the queen;
So that the construction of my palace might be carried out correctly and that my handiwork be completed, at that time, the god Aššur and the goddess Ištar revealed to me the presence of white limestone in the city Balāṭāya. (vi 10) Therein, I quarried mighty mountain sheep colossi, sphinxes, and large stone slabs for the gates of my lordly palace.
It has a 'station.' The 'paths' are 2, the upper one is short ...
To the god Nabû, powerful, splendid, pre-eminent, wise, scribe of everything, lord of everything, noble, majestic, (and) lofty, who makes opposing forces agree, who knows everything, splendid leader of all the Igīgū gods, who controls the Anunnakū gods, who ... the gods of heaven and netherworld, who ... the great gods, who ... the kingship of Ashurbanipal, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, ...
They shall pay the silver in its original amount in Tishri (VII). If they do not pay, it shall increase by a fourth.
... Witness ...
... my ...
I have heard that Zabinu, son of Arda-Mullissi, has said to the son of Zabinu: "Go and speak to the son of Yakin about killing the Babylonians."
... has been done. The ... is not ...
The son of Zerî, about whom the king my lord wrote to me, is a clergyman; he has come to ...
May Nabû, the august heir, put a serious venereal disease within you.
... , Treasurer;
40, the palace herald;
I brought Dunānu (and) his brother Aria of the land Buštus, Arizâ of the land Ariarma — the land of roosters — Kudurru of the land Saparda, Uriakki of the land Urarṭu, (and) Amris of the land Andia, together with their numerous troops, (25) who had stood with Abdi-Milkūti, the king of Sidon, (and) had come to his aid, ... , and I counted (them) as booty. I took away from him his royal
let him ...
4 Kushite horses from the commander-in-chief;
adjoining the estate of Ba... ,
He shall pay the silver back on the new moon of the month of Tishri (VII). If he does not pay, it shall increase by a fourth.
... at the disposal of Aššur-zaqip, ...
Indabibi, who sat on the throne of the land Elam after Tammarītu, saw the might of my weapons that had previously prevailed over the land Elam and (as for) the Assyrians whom I had sent (viii 35) to aid Nabû-bēl-šumāti, son of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), with whom they used to march about protecting his land like a friend and ally (and) whom Nabû-bēl-šumāti
12 minas of silver belonging to Nergal-šarru-uṣur, at the disposal of Šarru-lu-dari.
He recites a blessing for the tree.
The gods of the king in the house of Dagan.
1 duck, 10 turtledoves.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nashir-Bel. Good health to the king, my lord!
... Qišti-Nabû
Nabû-šezibanni,
6 straight garments, felted, the edging ... ;
I roared loudly like a storm (and) thundered like the god Adad against all of the troops of the wicked enemies. By the command of the god Aššur, the great lord, my lord, I blew like the onset of a severe storm against the enemy on (their) flanks and front lines. With the weapons of the god Aššur, my lord, and my fierce battle array, I turned them back and made them retreat. (v 60) I shot the troops of the enemy with uṣṣu-arrows (and) mulmullu
... of the palace manager
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, unrivalled king, pious shepherd who reveres the great gods, guardian of truth who loves justice, renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the insubmissive, (and) the one who strikes enemies with lightning:
I uprooted all of the Aḫlamû (Arameans) (and) Sutians. I put to the sword the inhabitants of the city Ḫirimmu, not sparing (any of) their offspring. I conquered the land of the Yasubigallians, a dangerous enemy. I destroyed the land Ellipi and wiped out its settlements.
1 1/3 mina ... of the crown prince;
Ashur-dan (III),
The mankind has become arrogant. Let the humble one who is worthy of  your father's house come and stay with you!
This (sluice) gate of the watercourse opened by itself without (the help) of spade or shovel and let an abundance of water flow through. Its (sluice) gate was not opened through the work of human hands. According to the heart’s desire of the gods, I made (it) gurgle with water. After I inspected the canal and made sure its construction was performed correctly, I offered pure sacrifices of fattened oxen (and) an abundance of sheep to the gods, who march at my side (and) who make my reign secure. I clot
The chariot which goes to the Akitu House and comes back has no driver. Without a driver it rocks about.
The woman Ša-pî-Bel-išmeya.
If the moon makes an eclipse in Nisan (I): the cultivated fields of the land will prosper.
(Property) of Ša-Aššur-dubbu, the crown prince.
... Zababa and Babu ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote me: "Feed the exorcists!" —
... the gods of the Šamaš temple
to ...
the king, my lord, ...
To the 'farmer,' our lord: your servants Adad-šumu-uṣur and Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health to our lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless  our lord!
2 seahs — Uar... ;
From Ašaredu.
Witness Balasî.
The king, my lord, may ask whether I have given the corn rations and the seed grain to the shepherds!
... a man ... a person ... a slave ... a city ... a house ... an estate ...
The king has given ...
I surrounded their (the palace rooms’) lower courses with slabs of breccia (and) alabaster, and large limestone slabs (and) made (them) an object of wonder.
... the delegate ...
Witness Adad-aplu-iddina.
... who are brought to us
... 41 persons ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
I opened up a foundation pit for the outer wall, Badnigerimḫuluḫa, (which means) “Terrorizer of Enemies,” then I dug down forty-five nindanu and made (it) reach the water table. I bound together strong mountain stone in the water below and above I expertly carried out its construction with large limestone (blocks) up to its copings.
... Il-yada' ...
... I (and) the šandabakku
He shall give them back in the month of Tishri (VII). If he does not, they shall increase by the same amount.
... are ...
In my dream, the great gods ...
in all x persons, servants of these gentlemen —
“... ,” an eršahunga-psalm to the king.
has taken ...
Sphinxes of alabaster, as well as sphinxes of cast urudû-copper that were overlaid with zaḫalû-silver, and sphinxes of cast ... -metal, whose features were brilliant:  I erected over them columns of ebony, cypress, cedar, daprānu-juniper, juniper, and Indian wood, with pašallu-gold and silver inlays, and (then) I positioned the architraves of the inner rooms of my lordly residence (on those columns).
... to the presence of ...
... with the lady NN
Performed in Arbela.
... The coils of the colon are 16 in number...
As to what the king wrote to me: "The Itu'eans of the commander-in-chief have not been brought out; what is the news about them?" —
(As for) the one who changes (an inscription) written in my name, defaces my representations, annuls the privileged status of Babylon, (and) breaks the covenant of the lord of lords, may the god Marduk, the Enlil of the gods, the lord of the lands, look with fury on him and order his destruction among all of the black-headed people. May he (the god Marduk) make his word bad in Ubšukkinnaku, the courtyard of the assembly of the gods, and order that his life not last (
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šarru-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Afterwards, the kings of the land Ḫatti — the land of Išdiakku (and) Mannea — (iv 35) mustered their forces for a wicked assault on the city Arbela. They besieged the city (and) made (it) their fortress. I, the fierce king, (iv 40) took fright at their strong belligerent attack and ordered the retreat of my warriors. I abandoned the city Arbela and took the road to the city Kish. I spent the night in the city Kish (and) (iv
To the king, our lord: your servants Nabû-zer-ketti-lešir and  Salamanu. Good health to the king, our lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, our lord!
