I sent my officials, the governors of the boundary areas of their land, with them and they trampled the people living in those cities (and) made (them) bow down at their feet. I imposed the tribute (and) payment of my lordship upon them.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
11 Kushite horses from the personal guard of ... ;
5 minas, 3 togas, 2 tunics: the Overseer of the Domestic Quarters;
... the 'station' ...
what I ...
... a cart
... Now then ...
in all an estate of 10 hectares ...
(As to) the sacred city-lords about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me, I am herewith sending to the king, my lord, the following:
Witness Ibni-šarru, chariot driver.
I made foundation inscriptions, wrote the deeds that I had done on them, and left (them) forever for future kings, my descendants. By the command of the god Marduk, the great lord whose command cannot be changed, I occupied the site of Babylon forever. I made the people of (foreign) lands conquered by me (and) the inhabitants of Babylon carry baskets (of earth) and they made bricks.
2 ... pots ... ;
Witness Urdu-Nabû, scribe.
... I carried off ... and 100 horses, his chariots, ... without number.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
I have sent ... to the Palace. The king, my lord, may act as he deems best.
... Qanâ, the ...
1, commandants of the ditto;
Nergal, Laṣ, Išum, Adad (and) Šala; Išum, Laṣ, Adad (and) Šala ... ; Išum, Laṣ, Adad (and) Šala ... ; Bel, Nabû, Išum, Laṣ, Adad (and) Šala ... ;
4 horses — Aššur-alik-pani;
40 hectares of field in the village of Nabû-na'id; Ṭab-šar-Sin, farmer, and his people.
Month Adar (XII), 12th day, eponym year of Bel-iqiša, governor of Tušhan.
... -šumu-iškun ...
Ahu-nuri ... ;
... the loss that ...
... -ilu, his wife, ... , 1 son, 1 daughter, 2 servants of his ... :
(As for) the Assyrian wall which had been built with baked bricks (colored with) lapis lazuli, a stone from the mountains, and which had become dilapidated and old, I removed its dilapidated section(s).
Nabû, Tukulti-Ninurta,
... of the goddess Ištar of the land of Arbela in the presence of Aššur ... and a message
When the god Šamaš, the great judge of heaven and earth, who loves my priestly service, gave me the arable land of Akkad in its entirety (and) placed in my hands the cultivation of grain and sesame, I added to it the arable land of Karduniaš (Babylonia) and Sumer and Akkad, (thus) increasing it by the command of the gods Šamaš and Marduk. I settled in it herds of domesticated animals (and) planted orchards. I irrigated it with water from the
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether ... or his sons or grandsons, or the ... of his palace, or ... ,
Witness Mannu-ki-Ninua, scribe.
... the god Nergal, who loves me, gave to me as a gift a weapon without equal and gave me the strength (and) might to destroy those hostile to Assyria. With his great support, I constantly achieved victory over the army of (any) enemy, smashed their weapons, (and) overwhelmed (them) like a flood. I did not leave a single one of the troops of (my) enemy (escape). I captured (and) plundered the troops of the Arameans, Sutians, (and) Aḫlamu, as far as the Lower Sea of the
... the great gods of heaven and earth,
If Jupiter becomes steady in the morning: enemy kings will be reconciled.
... Iau-'a
... , 2 ... -vessels;
10 shekels of silver belonging to Aššur-nadin-apli, at the disposal of Qurdi-Adad.
Witness Sa'ilu, porter.
... of the land Ḫalaḫḫu ... I/they brought him/it to my city Aššur. (5) ... I/they brought before me ... , horse trainers of ... , ... , wagons, ... , his heavy plunder. I/they carried off as booty ... , together with their possessions... I/they brought before me ... , oxen, sheep and goats, ... , (and) horses. I/they brought before me ... , oxen, sheep and goats, ... (10) I/they brought before me ... , ox
Aššur, lord, king of all the lands, ...
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
The king, my lord, should send a royal bodyguard to them (with this  order): "Just as you previously gave your men to Bel-emuranni, in the  same way give them to Aššur-mukin-paleya!"
horses ...
(As for) Gyges, the king of the land Lydia — a region on the opposite shore of the sea, a remote place, the mention of whose name none of the kings, my ancestors, had (ever) heard — (the god) Aššur, (the god) who created me, made him see in a dream my royal name. On the (very) day he saw this dream, he sent his mounted messenger to inquire about my well-being.
Rīmūt-ilī, his wife, mother, and three sons, a total of 5; ... ; Ṭab-šar-Sin, his wife and daughter, a total of 4; NN, ... ; an estate of 10 hectares of land in the town of Ḫamānu.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Witness Šarru-emuranni.
The boats of the people of Nabû-hamatua have been launched on the river, and they are coming and going. Am I not correct in this matter? ... the boat of the daughter of NN?
The money is paid completely.
Concerning the rites of the eclipse of the moon about which I spoke to the king, my lord, they should perform them this very day.
Why does Nabû-ahhe-šallim keep attacking my servants? He is a cohort commander; he keeps attacking my servants because of me. I have now written to the king, my lord; let the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
I have now written to Zakir ... and Lansî ... about the work  they are doing. Lansî told me the following: "The king has given me the  order to do this work. No one may give me a order contrary to the  order of the king. If a superior of mine comes, I shall send him to the  Palace. If the king, my lord, commands, I shall call up the rest of the  people and they will do the work."
If a planet becomes visible in Shebat (XI): the enemy will raid the land.
Bel-naṣir, ... , the scribe of the king, owner of the vineyard.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Uarbis or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Remanni-Adad, his sons and his grandsons, shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
A tablet of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, to the eunuch of Šarru-lu-dari, his brother. Good health to my brother!
Month Tebet (X), 25th day, eponym year of Abi-ram.
the weavers ...
... and ...
The hand of Rimutu ...
Ditto by Nikkal of Arbela!
... -riba
Total 400.
The gods of the king, my lord, know that the work on the boats  has begun. We are now waiting for the king, my lord.
... and Ullusunu
The king, my lord, should ask ... whether I did not give ... in the reign of the king, my lord.
Ubru-anaku, ... ;
All of the kingdom of Anu.
... his servant NN
If a planet rises in Elul (VI): rising of business, thriving of grain.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Dadî or his sons or his grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Zazî,
(As for) Aššur-lēʾi, who did not honor my kindness (and) sinned against the treaty, the father who had engendered me put a curse which cannot be removed in his mouth.
My father saw me and rejoiced greatly. During joyous celebrations, he kissed my feet. I made him rise from his seat and, (then) I seated him with joy on his seat in the palace of ... They kissed my feet and rejoiced greatly. During joyous celebrations, they kissed my feet.
... , Mannu-ki-Ninua, ...
... the image
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Concerning the wine ...
Witness Nabû-...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Riṣiṣu or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Aplaya and his sons and his grandsons,
all ...
If the earth quakes in Tammuz (IV): the cemetery of warriors will expand.
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord! The land of the king my lord is well.
News of the son of Yakin: he is in ...
... the king, my lord ...
If on the 15th day the moon and sun are seen together: a strong enemy will raise his weapons against the land; the enemy will tear down the city gate.
Witness Se'-dalâ.
The mortal enemy of my father, who had caused the death of many people, and was the cause of the downfall of my father's house, saw my father, who had fled from him, in a dream and said:
Now, may the king, my lord, send a bodyguard to the Palace Superintendent, and may he give back to me the gods of my father's house and the gods of  my brother's house, so that I may not have to take them from the temple(s).
The dead ...
Witness Aplu-uṣur, ...
who ... the well-being of ...
Just as gall is bitter, so may you, your women, your sons and your daughters be bitter towards each other.
(Property) of Atalia, queen of Sargon (II), king of Assyria.
among their number ...
Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, king of the four quarters (of the world); the one who (re)constructed the temple of the god Aššur, (re)built Esagil and Babylon, renewed ... , (re)confirmed the sattukku offerings of the great gods, (re)settled the confused people (and) made light shine forth for them; the one who (re)confirmed the appointments
Month Tishri (VII), ... th day, eponym year of Aššur-duru-uṣur.
Ilu-iqbi,
after ...
they placed him/it.
... should come out
... the prefects of ...
Now, if the king, my lord, orders, ...
thrice I marched to the lands Nairi (and) conquered the extensive lands Nairi from Tummu to the land Daiēnu. I conquered the interior of the land Ḫabḫu, the lands Ḫimua (and) Paiteru. I received their tribute of teams of horses in harness.
... Aššur-šumu-ka''in
I have sent my messenger to the commander-in-chief; as soon as ... , he will come, and we shall speak with him.
I wrote the (first) copy of the tablet of their exemptions on a clay tablet and gave it to them. Later, I wrote a second copy (and) sealed it. Now then, they have brought it to me again.
... in the palace
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 6th day, eponym year of Balaṭu, the prefect of Til-Barsip.
The Tebilti River, a tempestuous flood (of water) which had flowed from distant days by the side of the palace and which had caused erosion in its foundation when its flood was in full spate (and) had shaken its base:
Witness Nabû-dur-beliya.
To Sîn-ahu-uṣur:
You sing, “O Lord and King, light of the dais.”
... the vizier, my lord, ...
The 30 men who escaped from the weapons of  Šamaš-šumu-ukin are  in my presence. I have clothed them in coloured  clothing and have put silver bracelets on their wrists. They are  constantly blessing me, saying: "You are the saviour of Babylonia."
of my house ...
The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
May the king, our lord, write to his servant that he should  come, and may he (= the king) speak kindly with Nabû-uṣalla and give  orders to him. We, his servants, have been shattered on account of this  misdeed of his; we have become like women. There is no more respect for  the king and his word with us.
... they have bound him
There is a 'weapon'-mark in the 'yoke.' The top of the right surface of the 'finger' is split. The 'cap' rides upon the 'outside.'
I wrote to him that the king of Elam had written to me, saying: "The son of Yakin has come to my presence and told me: 'The king of Assyria has written to me, telling me that the governor of Arrapha has come to Assyria and said to me: 'The governor of Arrapha is in my presence; send (word) to the governor of the land of Bit-Yakin, telling him to send his army to me.'"
Witness Tabalayu.
The money is paid completely. Those men are purchased and acquired.
NN, gate-guard;
The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
Concerning the ... about which you wrote to me, ... who left ... , they may come  and enter ... ; the men ...
Mannu-iabi has contracted and bought (said property) from them.
... Witness Bel-hussanni.
Concerning the people of Kar-Šarrukin about whom you wrote, I have now issued an order. Their grain rations have been piled up in the storehouses, and they have been told to deliver them. Until I have their labour duty ready, I shall give them straw and they will make bricks. As soon as I have given them bricks, I shall give them seed corn and they will sow 1,000 (homers of) seed.
Witness Mannu-...
The ... of Aššur-mukin-paleya, which is in ... , is placed as a pledge in the ... of Aššur-šallim-ahhe, the mayor of the city of Til-Barsip.
To the king, my lord: your servant, Nabû-šumu-iddina. Good  health to the king, my lord. May Nabû and Marduk very greatly bless the king,  my lord. May Aššur, Sin, Šamaš, Bel, Nabû, Nergal, Ištar of Nineveh  and Ištar of Arbela call vigour, health, happiness, physical well-being and lasting days for the king, my lord.
Afterwards, Uallî, his son, sat on his throne. He saw the might of the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Nergal, (and) Nusku, the great gods, my lords, and bowed down to my yoke. For the preservation of his (own) life, he opened up his hands to me (and) made an appeal to my lordly majesty. He
A thigh, a shoulder, outer cuts,
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 9th day, eponym year of La-baši, chief of trade (657 B.C.).
2 pots of bouillon;
(As for) the Cimmerians, a dangerous enemy who had never feared my ancestors, and, with regard to me, had not grasped the feet of my royal majesty, (ii 10') with the support of the gods Aššur, Bēl (Marduk), and Nabû, the great gods, my lords, he (Gyges) clamped (them) in manacles, handcuffs, (and) neck-stocks and sent (them) before me, together with his substantial audience gift(s). I constantly saw the might of the
(But as for) the one who erases my inscribed name by some crafty device, (or) destroys my royal inscription, or changes its position, may the goddess Ištar, the great lady, speak evil of him before the god Bēl (and) the goddess Bēltīya (and) make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the lands!
We shall go and attack the men of Bit-Yakin.
If the king, my lord, orders, I will question them. The king, my lord, should know this.
Seal of NN, ... ,
I had a canopy, which rivals the heavens, made from musukkannu-wood, a durable wood. I clad its perimeter with thirty-four talents (and) twenty minas of reddish gold and (thereby) reinforced its bonds. I stretched out its covering over the god Marduk, the great lord, and (thus) secured its roof.
Nabû-šarru-uṣur, of the town of Ša-ṣidqi.
... of the temple ...
their sons ...
8 homers.
I was afraid of death, uncertain of my ability, uncertain of my... I did not go to that battle. I sent my messenger to Aššur-le'i.
... minas of silver
... to the city of Akkad
Witness ...
What I told him was this: "You are an able scribe; if you wish, take the office of prefect or of cohort commander, or even that of recruitment officer; but if you do not wish (any of these), take the office of team commander and lead your men!"
As to the Arameans about whom my brother wrote, I have sent  some of them to the king, my lord, in charge of Ṣalam-ahhe.
... these ...
Now, if it is acceptable to the king, my lord, the king should give an order to Nabû-eṭir: he should come and settle (the matter) with my servants.
If at the moon's appearance one horn meets the other: the flood will come. — It will let the month pass; it is not eclipsed.
He brought before me ... , a gift (presented) to me by the people of the land Elam. (... ) I had mercy on Necho, the king of the land Šais, and (... ) I gave (... ) him the city ... as a grant. I ... Šarru-lū-dāri, a eunuch of mine whom I had stationed in Egypt, to be his lord (... ) I set Šarru-lū-dāri over the people of the land Egypt and (... ) imposed upon him (the payment of) tribute (and)
(Owner) of the ... being sold. Third year of Sennacherib, king of Assyria.
... of the gate
Good health to the king, my lord!
... the goddesses Tašmētu and Nanāya, who go before them, ... in the marshy plain.
... of this ...
Witness Kannunayu.
24 shekels of silver, capital, belonging to Kumayu, at the disposal of La-tubašanni-ilu, wine master.
I sent a eunuch of mine, the chief eunuch, to the land Elam. I gave him the following orders: “Do whatever you see and hear, and do not conceal anything from me by any means! As soon as you have seen and heard, write me by express mail and by telegraph!”
(As for) Ummanaldašu (Ḫumban-ḫaltaš III), the king of the land Elam who had seen the rage of the weapon of (the god) Aššur, my lord, he returned from the mountain(s), his place of refuge, and he entered the city Madaktu, which I had destroyed, demolished, (and) plundered by the command of (the god) Aššur, my lord. He sat down in mourning, at a place of mourning. Ummanaldašu, the king of the
Witness Marduk-šarru-uṣur, cohort commander.
1 house, 2 gardens ... ;
2 tureens of bouillon;
adjoining the town of Bit-ša-amurani,
If Adad thunders ...
3, the scribes of the chief eunuch;
Month ... , 19th day, eponym year of Marduk-šarru-uṣur.
Tab-belu.
Aššur-nirka-da''in,
The word of the king concerning the elders of Elam.
At that time, I made the enemy people whom I had captured carry baskets (of earth)
... of the extispicy.
The base of the middle 'finger' of the lung is 'bound.'
The king has sent me; let me go and bring out my father's house, my  brothers, my sisters and the servants of my father's house, and let me come  and ... to the king!"
10 ... ;
What is it that the king, my lord, commands?
Nabû-šumu-iddina ...
... me the Gambuleans
The king's word to the commander-in-chief:
The king came out. He strewed salt on the tables in the qirsu-enclosure of the god.
May he bring his gift(s) to the temple of Aššur, and may Aššur, the great lord, (then) accept his gifts with pleasure and may he bless the king, my lord, and his seed.
Witness Nabû'a.
Witness Šep-...
Witness NN. Witness Aya-yababa.
adjoining a street.
... -iddin, ditto, ditto;
If a bird carries flesh, a bird or anything, and drops it into  the house of a man, the said man will receive a large inheritance.
Adad-le'i, prefect;
there ...
Witness ... -ili, ...
The lord, whose brilliance overwhelms the Igīgū and Anunnakū gods, (and) whose lordship is the most outstanding among all rulers!
I built (and) completed that palace from its foundations to its battlements.
Concerning the king's subjects who are in Kar-Tukulti-Ninurta, about whom my lord wrote to me: "Let them fetch and bring them" — as soon as they have brought and fetched them, should I give them to my lord? Or should ... , until ... ?
tribute of the ...
Because I ... , because I ... , because I am a dog who fears the king, my lord, (and) because I am loyal to the king, my lord, ... upon ...
at the disposal of Bel-... ṣalli,
... the son of Abu-eriba
I plundered the Aḫlamû-Arameans from the edge of the  land Sūḫu to the city Carchemish of the land Ḫatti in a single day. (25) I crossed the Euphrates after them in rafts (made of inflated) goatskins. I conquered six of their cities at the foot of Mount Bešri. I brought their booty, possessions, and goods to my city Aššur. I annexed those lands to Assyria (and) placed a eunuch of mine as provincial
(As for) Nabû-šuma-ēreš, the šandabakku (governor of Nippur) who did not honor (my) treaty, he suffered from dropsy, (that is) “full water.”
... of Inurta-...
100 ... horses,
... Bel-eṭir, the scribe of the crown prince, and the eunuchs ... who are with him ... have fled to Bel-... , a servant of NN.
Witness Marduk-šakin-šumi, royal bodyguard.
We are now waiting for them, and are keeping watch over them. As soon as they have set out, we shall write to the Palace.
The old-fashioned razor which stood there since time immemorial had a lamassu-figure on it.
Let the man come tomorrow. I will speak with the king, and he will go.
... very
have not been collected ...
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Ditto by Marduk and Zarpanitu!
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether these men or their sons or grandsons, seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Puṭi-athiš, shall return the money tenfold to its owner.
... Isî,
11th day.
and his people, ... ,
News of the Urarṭian: ... the commander-in-chief of the Gurreans, the ... of the Mannean, the ... of the Cimmerian, and Urarṭian troops ... have crossed over to the other side (of the river).
He shall pay in Iyyar (II).
As to what you wrote: "Urpala'a may slip away from the king, my lord, on account of the fact that he is afraid of the king, and the people who are loyal to him will disperse the forces of Urpal'a and render him powerless" — this is exactly what I was afraid of. Up until now he has kept watch with me, and the people who were loyal to him rallied around him and held fast the forces of Urpal'a, (but now) as soon as he saw that the king, my lord, was angry with his servants, he sent
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
At that time, by the command of Aššur, the king of the gods, and the god Marduk, the king of the gods, the previous temple of the Assyrian Ištar, which Shalmaneser (III), king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), a ruler who came before me, had built, had become dilapidated and old...
to... the king, my lord
Witness ... a, son of Bel-šezib.
— Venus stands in the west.
a cup of olives;
If the wolf star is like a cloudbank: in that year the harvest of the land will prosper ...
The caravan from the side of the river has arrived. The ... s of the  caravan have come out and said: "We have been sent to the other bank of the  river to raise the bull colossus." (However) they have not yet started work  on it. Their men are few, and they are busy. They said: "We will do it  together."
... the seed of his father's house ...
... their ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health  to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
1 ... of obsidian, lapislazuli and carnelian;
A thigh, a shoulder, outer cuts;
The king, my lord, should send a bodyguard to me. If the king, my lord, commands, I will go where the king, my lord, sends me to.
... are in the hands of the king, my lord.
Tiglath-pileser, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (I), vice-regent of the god Aššur:
to ...
The king, my lord, should quickly send the mule express that goes to Borsippa, so that they can express-deliver the king's sealed order that went (there) to the express-station, and the express-station may read it to the king, my lord.
Witness Saka-kašid.
... the governor of Harran
Those who are present shall pay in full the fine on their sheep.
a 2-seah jar of amūmu-beer;
... a tent in the house ...
... -iškun
I said: "... will come ...
The lords of kings ...
... I am alive
Nabu-belu-usur,
... the king ...
who with us ...
Palace of Shalmaneser, great king, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also strong king, king of the universe, and king of Assyria: property of the palace.
... the king, my lord
... the town of Attia, near Penzâ
to Abbâ the ...
... of the staff-bearer ...
... the front red, of the country;
If Jupiter is bright when it comes out: the king of Akkad will reach the highest rank; the king of Akkad will become strong and have no rival; the cattle of Akkad will lie in the steppe undisturbed; there will be joy among the people; the king will become happy; the cattle of Akkad will lie in the steppe undisturbed.
you ...
I am now sending the letter to the king, my lord, in the hands of my messenger. The king, my lord, should call his servants to account.
The king, in the presence of the ...
— On the 14th day the moon is seen together with the sun.
of ... the troops of the king of troops
The king, my lord, can be glad indeed. The god has remembered his servant, and has given him a fine health and a long life. As the king, my lord, said, "The time (for praying) is long," — really, it is very short.
until I ...
We have written to the king, our lord, (about) a matter that we know. If  it is acceptable to the king, our lord, we shall write to the royal corps  about it. We shall also write to the palace scribe.
We are dead dogs. We have spoken to the chief cupbearer ... , (but) we have not seen him.
I have sent ... to the Palace.
May Bel and Nabû let the king, my lord, live forever!
The crown prince of Andia and the crown prince of Babylon have (already) come, (and) the king of Elam is going to come. When are they going to arrive? It is an impasse.
Total 1,112 — Ululayu.
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
... to the guard ...
2 ditto — Inurta-alik-pani
NN;
Now I am going to send 20 horses of my own to the prefect, until my lord sends me more.
... his people
... whom Zeru-ken
Seal of ... , owner of the women being sold.
Nabu-eriba, servant of Ša-Nabû-šû —
who directs ...
Witness ... -ili.
The house of Aššur-šallim, the house of Nabû-naṣir, the house of Ṣillaya, the house of Zarutî, the house of Dannaya, the house of Kakkullanu, the house of Nabû-šezib, the house of Nabû-šumu-iddina, the house of Mušezib-Nabû.
... I said to the king, my lord: "... they will die. The king, my lord ... "
On the 2nd of Elul (VI) I sent Šarru-lu-dari, the governor, to  capture the fort.
Witness Nabû-da''inanni, ditto.
Witness Mannu-lu-šulmu
I had a palace of breccia, alabaster, elephant ivory, ebony, boxwood, musukkannu-wood, cedar, cypress, juniper, and elammaku-wood, (a palace that I named) Egalzagdinutukua (“The Palace Without a Rival”), constructed thereon as my royal residence.
in ...
... of the moat
The palace of Amēl-Marduk, the great courtier, the grand vizier, son of Šamaš-šuma-ukīn.
Month of Sivan (III), eponym year of Bel-na'id, governor of ...
Aššur-bēl-kala, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-nārārī (II), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-rabi (II), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-rabi (I), vice-regent of the god Aššur.
... I took the road in pursuit of Tanutamon (and) I marched as far as the city Thebes, his fortified city. (v 15) He saw the assault of my mighty battle array and abandoned the city Thebes; he fled to the city Kipkipi. With the support of the gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Nergal, (and) Nusku, I conqu
of the king, my lord, has reached ...
He shall return the money tenfold to its owners, who have appeared in  the centre of Nineveh, within 30 days. He shall contest in his lawsuit  and not succeed. The judge shall not heed his case.
a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
x vineyards in the town of Til-lini; Gurdî, gardener, and his people;
The exorcist ...
... field of Ṭurî in the town of ...
(As to) the Arameans who are in Sippar, I have sent them to the river ordeal.
... day ...
2 'litres' of midru-bread; 2 'litres' of spiced bread.
... the king, my lord said
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
The king has sent a letter to his servant. Let me see the face of the king, my lord, and may I get well!
(Property) of Adad-nārārī, son of Arik-dīn-ili.
On my eighth campaign, I marched against Dunānu, son of Bēl-iqīša, to the land Gambulu, which had put its trust in the king of the land Elam (and) had not bowed down to my yoke. With my mighty battle array, I covered the land Gambulu in its entirety like a fog. I conquered the city Ša-pī-Bēl, his fortified city, whose location is situated between rivers.
The king's word to the Babylonians: I am well; you can be glad.
an estate of x hectares adjoining the road that leads from ... to the ... , adjoining Nabû-šumu-iškun,
... as the king, my lord, ...
Nabû-ahu-iddina of Bit-... — which ... of the chief eunuch
... s
Witness Issar-šumu-iddina, scribe.
Ditto, ditto; may they make bread to be worth gold in your land, and may you have to pay for it in the temples of your gods! May the cost of grain be so high that one litre of bread will have to be paid for with a mina of silver!
The lord of kings, my lord, can be very glad indeed. You will defeat the enemy and vanquish the foes of the lord of kings, your lord.
Ditto by Ištar, who dwells in Nineveh! Ditto by Ištar, who dwells in Arbela!
The heart of the sheep is normal.
... is Bel-ibni
Witness Gimillu, ...
The charge of the rear palace is well. We are doing (our) work and stay awake (with him) unremittingly, and we pray to the gods. The king, my lord, can be glad.
... bedroom ...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Hattayu or his sons, grandsons, brothers or nephews, or his prefect or mayor, or any relative of his, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Mannu-ki-Adad and his sons and grandsons, shall place ten minas of silver and one mina of gold in the lap of Ištar of Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Witness Na'di-Adad.
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, then I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, fortified cities, together with the small(er) settlements in their environs (and) the district of the land Bīt-Barrû in its entirety, and I added (this area)
... ;
You have put ... in place like ...
... of the temple of ... I built. For the goddess Mullissu, my lady: ...
Witness Remut-ili.
Let the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity ...
... the cavalry ...
came ...
The king, my lord, can be glad indeed about the work on the river.
... the king of Babylon ... the sea ... the king of Elam ... the sea ... the king of the land Elam ... the king of Babylon ... the sea ... the king of Elam ... the king of Babylon ... the sea ... the king of Elam ... to the sea ... the king of Babylon ...
I am herewith sending to the king, my lord, NN, the son of  NN, together with his sister, his mother and ...
... his sons
Nabû-shezibanni, ditto;
... to the presence of the king ...
Total, of Ṭab-ahhe, son of Kuzubî.
to ...
Let me gather the forces of the god Aššur and go to ... who is in the district of Karkaššî. The troops of the god Aššur, which are in Egypt, will ... to me. Let the scholar who is with me ...
Urdu-Nabû, the son of Bel-iddina, who is now ill, and on whom the 'hand' of Nanaya of Uruk is being placed in extispicy —
If an eclipse begins in the east and goes to the west: the king of the Westland will rule the world.
Witness Šar-Issar, ...
1 hand-ring of gold, 1/4 mina less 1 1/2 shekels; 1 arm-ring, 1/3 (mina) less 1 1/2 shekels: Upaq-ana-Arbail.
By that command, which cannot be changed, may the fate of the father who had engendered me be established as favorable before the god Sîn, the lord of the gods.
At that time the temple of the Assyrian Ištar, my mistress, which Ilu-šumma, my forefather, vice-regent of Aššur, a prince who preceded me, had previously built — that temple had become dilapidated and I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I completed it from top to bottom and deposited my monumental inscription.
owner of the ... being sold.
Witness NN, cohort commander.
In the past days, when Nabû-ahhe-eriba was with me, we used to discuss all kinds of matters with one another, and we used to give one another advice. Now that he has been promoted, he will perhaps say to the king:
... outside ...
Concerning the son of Lu-balaṭ whom the king, my lord, sent to me, saying: "Send him to Zabban" — I went and sent him to Zabban. The son of Lu-balaṭ stayed ten days in my presence, and during all this time nobody entered or left the presence of the king, my lord, except the messenger of the son of Lu-balaṭ. After he had entered and stayed ten days in my presence, he went on, saying: "I am going to see the face of the king, my lord." He went to see the
the men of the commander-in-chief will kill them. They will seize upon (them) and kill (them).
Does your great divinity know it? Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Samsi-ila'i, courtier;
... his ... will be good.
Review Palace of Nineveh;
... ni,
The coils of the colon are ... in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
a flagon of beer of bruised grain.
... the Lady of Nineveh
care of the chief cook of the palace.
... I built a palace of breccia, alabaster, elephant ivory, ebony, boxwood, musukkannu-wood, cedar, cypress, juniper, elammaku-wood, (and) Indian wood, for my lordly residence; then I had a portico, a replica of a Hittite palace, constructed opposite (its) gates. I paved (... ) a path ... for the processional way of (the god) Aššur, my lord, and ... a portico, a replica of a Hittite palace,
... the men who were taken away
From Ašaredu the younger, servant of the king.
... his ... in his mouth
Witness Adad-šumu-iškun, ...
total, the palace supervisor.
... to ...
The money is paid completely. That woman is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... 34 ditto ditto ditto, of the country;
will bring them in, and ...
Total Aššur-matu-taqqin, village manager.
a total of 190 Kushite horses and 350 cavalry mounts —
... are attacking him
May the goddess Ištar, mistress of battle and war, break his bow in the thick of battle and have him crouch under his enemy.
... I am not strong enough to fight with him; ... of the father of the king, my lord, ...
... the Hamaraneans
From Issar-šumu-ereš.
have been brought to me ...
... s, in all 62, have come in today.
... ;
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. The very  best of health to the king, my lord! May the gods of Earl (672)  bless the king, my lord!
In the eponymy of Šulmu-beli-lašme, the governor of Der, the city Nineveh, the city Calah, the city Arrapha, the city Lahiru, the city Barhalzi, the city Diquqina, the city Arbela, the city Lubdu, the city Kurbail, the city Ashdod, the city Gaza, the city Qedar, the city Edom, the city Moab, the city Ammon, the city Azaqan, the city Ashkelon, the city Ekron,
of the king ...
Witness Adad-naṣir, ...
A tablet of Iqisu to the commander-in-chief.
... the king, my lord
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
Witness Nabû-...
... there is
The king's word to NN: I am well; you can be glad.
3 bags of sesame;
Witness Isanayu.
... to Merodach-Baladan
NN and his people, ... ,
(As for) the kings who sit on (royal) daises, in distant days, may the gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Adad, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Šarrat-Kidmuri, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Nergal, (and) Nusku, make their name, their seed, their offspring, (and) their progeny disappear from the land, and may they not have pity on them. May the god Adad
... will reach ...
The name of the other one is Ubru-Adad, ... ; he is the son of a ... of the house of ...
... the house of my father ... (and) the house of my grandfather, (both) of which had been given to me, (and) the possessions of those two houses, everything (in them), I gave to the goddess Tašmētu, who had raised me like (my own) birth-mother.
A play in three acts. Shamash-belu-usur, the playwright.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-iqbi. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
... Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it? Does your great divinity know it?
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
On my eighth campaign, I marched against Dunānu, son of Bēl-iqīša, to the land Gambulu, which had put its trust in the king of the land Elam (and) had not bowed down to my yoke. With my mighty battle array, I covered the land Gambulu in its entirety like a fog. I conquered the city Ša-pī-Bēl, his fortified city, whose location is situated between rivers.
Witness NN, scribe.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
... who ...
The city Adummatu, the abode of the god Adad, which Sennacherib — king of Assyria, the father of the father who had engendered me — had taken in hand for renovation, (and) on which earlier kings, my ancestors, had worked, (but) whose construction they had carried out inexpertly: The walls of the city Adummatu, which are situated like the nests of eagles, on the peak of Mount Sirāra, a rugged mountain, (and) which from the days of the past, in (the time of)
If the moon is red at its appearance: the land will see plenty.
... in the shadow of the king's throne ...
Dayan-Inurta,
And ... the news of ... : he has been defeated and captured.
Witness Riba-ahhe.
Month of Ša-sarrāte, eponymy of Nabû-dūrī-uṣur (672 B.C.).
of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, ...
Disregard what happens after my stipulated term...
From Balasî.
... has been done. The ... has been put in place. The ... has been put in place. The ... has been put in place. All is well.
They are free from quay and crossing dues on land  or water; they shall not pay ... and leather taxes; ... his clients are  exempt like he himself.
Perhaps they are saying nice things about you in the palace. Let them write me what  the king my lord commands.
May Nabû (and) Marduk bless the king, my lord. May they give to the king, my lord, long days and  everlasting years.
Zer-Issar, son of Ruhu'a; ... ;
... na, ...
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also king of Assyria: property of the city Kalḫu.
... you did not give ...
in all 9 persons, at the disposal of Kiṣir-... , the horse trader.
Witness Šumma-Adad. Witness Ahu-nuri.
Arbayu the (ruler) of Dilbat and Qanâ, the (ruler) of Sippar, have come to Nippur and said to Nabû-ušabši: "... "
I have finished the fortress of the king, my lord. I have brought in 200  stone-borers and 500 stone-hammers from the Inner City, and have  appointed the stone-borers and stone-hammers under the command of the  prefect of Naṣibina. I have given the order to the prefect of Naṣibina:  "Collect the stone-borers and the stone-hammers and assign them to the  Naṣibina guard!"
Palace of Šamšī-Adad, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Tiglath-pileser (I) (who was) also vice-regent of the god Aššur.
Witness Šep-Issar, servant of the governor of Calah.
... he sent ... to Nineveh, before me, to do obeisance, ... (and) to ask for my lordly help. He sent ... , his eldest son, ... (5') ... , together with a large marriage gift, to serve as a bride for the god Bēl (Marduk) and the goddess Bēltīya (Zarpanītu), and he kissed my feet.
to them ...
I received gold (and) shining silver sling straps as their wrist-trappings (and) slashed off their belts with sharp swords. I took away gold (and) silver (decorated) belt-daggers as their waist-trappings.
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, chariot driver.
... its base is ...
The coils of the colon are 16 in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
... The 'finger' is thick...
As to what you wrote: "I marched to the land of the Bīt-Yakīn and conquered the city Niqqu of the land of the Bīt-Yakīn. I carried off 2,000 people, together with their possessions, (and) the gods of the land of the Bīt-Yakīn. (Thus) I established my victory and strength over the land of the Bīt-Yakīn. (... )"
... is normal ...
The 'station' is present. The 'path' ... The left side of the gall bladder is split ...
a cup of quinces;
10 talents 17 minas ...
— Jupiter stood there one month over its period.
... 1 cloak, the front red, of the port, ... ;
The 'path' is present. The 'strength' is present. The 'well-being' is present. The 'base of the throne' is present. The 'increment' is normal. The 'finger' is thick...
... , son of ...
3 ... ;
The bearer of the holy scepter, the circumspect ruler,
The king, my lord, should know (this).
I joyfully entered his palace, which is in Babylon, then I opened his treasury and brought out gold, silver, gold (and) silver utensils, precious stones, all kinds of possessions (and) property, a substantial treasure, (together with) his wife, his palace women, courtiers, attendants, all of the craftsmen, as many as there were, (and) his palace attendants, and I counted (them) as booty.
The ... of the bed are two 'litres' each. The ... of the bed are two 'litres' each.
and their sons
And after I had inquired and investigated, I wrote to my lord.
The king, my lord, should send word that they are to write down their desert villages. Ever since the king my lord has levied pack animals from Hamath, I have been on my own, and he (=  Abi-lešir) and they (= Adad-isse'a and Bel-lešir) have been on their own. Tomorrow the king my lord will surely kill me, saying: "You are but a bunch of do-nothings!"
He should do whatever is acceptable to me."
Sanda-uarri, a servant of Sanâ son of Dabibu, killed the governor of the city Lubdu and the city Arrapḫa, a servant of the king of the land Lubdu, and (then) put in place an informer, and sent (him) to the king of Assyria. When the king of Assyria heard this, he sent a eunuch of his to the city Lubdu. The eunuch seized Sanda-uarri and brought (him) to Assyria, and (then) the king of Assyria sent (him) to
After Yakīn-Lû, the king of the land Arwad, had gone to (his) fate, Azi-Baʾal, Abī-Baʾal, (and) Adūnī-Baʾal, the sons of Yakīn-Lû who reside in the middle of the sea, came up from the middle of the sea, came with their substantial audience gift(s), and kissed my feet. I looked upon Azi-Baʾal with pleasure and installed (him) as king of the land Arwad. I clothed
Witness Hur-waṣi.
My men who were in the ... of Mannea have been taken prisoner.
... to the king
... will get scared ...
I settled them in the cities Ḫarrua (and) Ḫalḫalauš, which are on the border of the land Bīt-Adini. I placed them under the authority of a eunuch of mine, the governor of the city Arrapḫa. I had a stele made, had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over them written on it, and I erected (it) in (that) city.
The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
a basket of (mixed) fruit.
Zizî;
... has been seized
An estate of 1 hectare of land adjoining Mannu-ki-Arbail and the ... of the town Šamaš-na'id;
Witness Ahû'a-šallim, ditto.
... I ordered him to ... against the Arameans, and he went. The Arameans ... his men; a few of them escaped and came to Aššur-... ,  saying: "The ... has been killed by an arrow."
... abode ...
... Bit-Yakin will not be happy
... to ... ; just as ... , so may they give ... to the king, my lord!
If Venus disappears in the east in Ab (V) from the 1st to the 30th day: there will be rains; the harvest of the land will prosper.
of the days ...
NN, the eunuch whom Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, sent to Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the rab mūgi, saying: "Go and perform the sacrifices of the ṣīpu ceremony of the month Ab (V) for Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the rab mūgi, son of Abi-yaqar, the rab mūgi of Nineveh" — I went and performed (them) according to (their) original rites.
... , Damascus;
To the king, my lord: your servant Gabbu-ana-Aššur.
Land of Ramman-Dadi
you invoke the names of ...
Witness ... ayu, ditto.
... Aššur-šezibanni
1 seah 1 'litre' of regular offering loaves;
... they should be placed before Šamaš. The sheep should be 10 (in number).
Nabû-remanni, his two sons, ... his wife, a total of 4;
The woman who removes the jewellery is the woman ...
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Month of Iyyar (II), 5th day, eponym year of Abi-yaqar.
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
A thigh, a shoulder, outer cuts;
Witness Nabû-zeru-lešir.
To the king, my lord: your servant Mannu-ki-Ninua. Good health to the king, my lord! The land of the king my lord is well.
I wrote to you from the beginning: "You and Upaq-ana-Arbail should stay in the reed hut until I have cleared away the snakes." Did I not write to you in the second letter that they should stay (there) until the 1st of Elul (VI)?
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, (or) changed or altered the proceedings...
... the Kassites
... them. They are ...
20 cows of his own;
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: good for Akkad, bad for Elam and the Westland.
... the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me and I marched to the land ... (5) The land ... I uprooted their people, ... (and) brought (them) to my city Aššur. I placed a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over them... the people of the land ... (and) I imposed upon them (the same state) service (and) corvée duty as if (they were) Assyrians... the god Aššur, my lord, I/they will conquer ...
Now then I am sending the ... s to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord, ask them why ... ed the ... of the king, my lord.
I surrounded (and) conquered the city Ḫatarikka, which belonged to Aramu, the Urarṭian.
I had a stele made, had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, written on it, and I erected (it) on the plain of the city Ḫalulê. I made (an image of) the god Aššur, my lord, wear a crown, and placed (it) on the top of the stele.
I have been honoured, I have gained footing ... Because of the king, my lord, I have gained footing before the Cimmerians. Before the Cimmerians I ... ed the ... of the king, my lord, and the ... of Aššur-šallimanni.
... the king ...
The troops who are in Kiš are 2,000 in number. I have  been telling the king, my lord, that they should move up to the  mountain, but they don't agree but say: "We are at peace, we are  not moving up to the mountain."
From Nergal-apil-kumu'a.
I ordered the march to the land Ḫatti. Before my arrival, Ispabāra, their king, abandoned his fortified cities (and) his treasury and fled far away. I overwhelmed all of his wide land like a fog.
... of a second ...
... much ...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, should send Ša-Nabû-šû, (his) chief eunuch, with the army at his disposal, to the district of Egypt, as he wishes, and whether he should go ... as far as the city Kār-Bānīti.
... you
owners of the tabriu being sold.
He said: "Aššur-iddina ...
1 dromedary, ...
(As to) the mules that the king, my lord, gave me, I have  appointed the palace supervisor of the mules as far as the Ukkean.
Witness Issar-ma'adi.
If a fog rolls and a wind rises: fall of Elam.
Moreover, I struck with the sword Teušpa, a Cimmerian, together with his entire army, in the (territory of) the land Ḫubušna, a region of the land Kummuḫu. I imposed upon him a heavy tribute of silver, gold, (and) iron in the midst of the land Kummuḫu.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
... of the people of Assyria together with ...
The palace of Tiglath-pileser, king of Assyria: (This is) the audience gift that Abī-baʾl, king of the land Samsimuruna, presented to me.
I built (and) completed (it) from its foundations to its crenellations and I settled the god Ḫaya, the god of scribes, inside it. I named it Ešarra-ḫammat. “House (where) the Assembly (takes place)” is its (lit. “its”) name. Its (lit. “his”) symbol is the holy scepter. Its (lit. “his”) emblem is the holy crown.
The middle of the 'station' is effaced ...
... ;
... Sargon (II)
... , Ahu-duri.
... your ...
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Bīt-Daganna, Joppa, Banayabarqa, (and) Azuru, the cities of Ṣidqâ that had not submitted to me quickly. I approached Azuru, (ii 10') a fortress of the land Gaza that Sanda-uarri, the king of the land Gaza, had abandoned in the face of the advance of my expeditionary force. I entered Azuru, (ii 15') a place of great terror, and I slaughtered the soldiers, (both
Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, has contracted and bought (said property) from Birtayu, chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, for 1/2 mina of silver by the (mina) of Carchemish.
Urdu-Nabû, son of ... , farmer, his wife, mother, brother, and sister;
That which is (written) on the (symbols of) the gods that (are around) the neck of the god Nergal.
2 sheep, 1 bowl (of wine):
Witness ... -abu-uṣur, tailor, servant of the city ...
Month Elul (VI), 13th day.
I have sent my messenger to the commandant of Cutha for the well-being of the king, my lord. He will go there, and I shall follow behind him.
When I heard this matter I wrote to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should not let it pass over in silence. They should at the same time question (him) about the rest of the captives.
In the hidden depths of (its) subterranean waters I bonded together, with bitumen, reeds below (and) strong mountain stone above, then I raised (that) area out of the water and converted (it) to dry land. (15') I filled in and measured a terrace of 700 large aslu-cubits along (its) longer side, 162 large aslu-cubits along (its) upper, northern shorter side, 217 large aslu-cubits along the inner, shorter side, (and)
To the king, my lord: your servant, Bel-iddina. I pray every day to Aššur, Šamaš, Bel and Nabû for the long life, happiness and good health of the king, my lord.
I have heard that Ahhešaya ... is collecting the rest of the Borsippeans who are there and intends to migrate them. If he migrates them, I shall write to the king, my lord, whatever news I hear.
In my eleventh regnal year I crossed the Euphrates for the ninth time... I captured ninety-five cities of Sangara (and) one hundred cities of Aramu. I annexed (them) to Assyria (and) added (them) to the province of the chief cupbearer.
... Unfavorable.
Silver, gold, possessions, (and) property of the land of Sumer and Akkad — Karduniaš (Babylonia), all (of it) — that the former kings of the land Elam had carried off seven times (and) brought inside the land Elam; red ṣariru-gold, shiny ešmarû-metal, precious stones, valuable jewelry, royal appurtenances, garments with multi-colored trim, linen garments, all kinds of possessions (and) property without number; (10) large horses, people — male
The money is paid completely. Those fields, houses, gardens and people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
As to what you wrote me: "The servants of Nabû-killanni have not agreed to transport the wood" — I will send word and have them transport it.
... 1/2 'litre';
The front of the atrophied part is effaced. The middle part is elevated...
Witness NN, ... of the town of Baba-eṭir. Witness NN, ...
Bel-dan,
... you should have come ...
... to observe ...
He brought before me (his) daughter, his own offspring, and the daughters of his brothers to serve as housekeepers. He brought his son, who had never crossed the sea, to do obeisance to me. (iii 35') I received from him his daughter and the daughters of his brothers, together with a large marriage gift. I had mercy on him and (then) I gave (his) son, his offspring, back to him.
From Ašaredu the older.
... the king, our lord, ...
I brought back all together ... the chariots along with their ... , the wagons along with their mules, the horses along with their ... , (and) the Bactrian camels along with their ...
... this favorable sign ...
Witness ...
... the deputy
At that time the wall of my city, Aššur, which kings who preceded me had previously built, had become dilapidated and old. I cleared away its debris, renewed and restored that wall. I dug a large moat around the wall — a large moat which no king who preceded me had previously built. At the bottom of the moat I reached ground water. I made bricks and constructed the wall. I deposited my monumental inscriptions and clay inscriptions.
... the vertebrae are recessed...
adjoining the field of Šulmu-beli, ...
... ;
the house of ...
Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, king of kings, lord of lords, ruler of rulers, prince, lord of all, conqueror of the rebellious — those who do not submit to him (and) who are hostile to the god Aššur—, defeater of the princes of the Qutu as far as the land Meḫru, disperser of the forces of the land of the Šubaru and the remote lands Nairi as far as the border of Makan, strong king, capable
To the king, my lord: your servant Bel-upahhir. Good health to the king, my lord!
may ... !
... , ... , Anunitu, Ea-šarru, Damkina, Bel-labria, Laban, Nabû, Gubaba, Abakuwa, the Fates, Šarrat-eqi, the Queen of Heaven, Tašmetu, the Lady of Kidmuri, the Lady of Arbela, the Great Gods, the Seven Gods, the Narudi, the Tigris gods, the Rivers (and) the Mountains:
I, Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, ...
Witness Šulmu-šarri.
1 bag of sesame; 6 ditto of kernels.
500 sheep, of Dada-... ;
Witness Tuqunu-ereš, merchant.
I have made it clear to him that he must hand over the man, and he has promised to give him to me. But he is stalling and delaying (the handover), saying: "(If) I give him to you, what can you do for me? I will give you an equivalent (amount) of wool, (and) in addition to it I will give you 100 talents of copper. (If) you take away (the man) without (giving) me (anything), I will go and complain to the king about you." I have told him that the man is not to
Witness Banî, deputy of the chief physician.
Ubbuku, treasurer;
Witness Ubru-milki, son of Nabû-nadin-ahi.
... you will go
we have ... ed ...
Witness Sin-na'id, ditto. Witness Nabû-šezib, ditto.
has given ... ; one ...
... whether
20 minas, NN, merchant ...
The ... s who went ...
... -ili, ditto;
101 cavalrymen, 230 grooms, in all 331 grooms.
a ditto of olives; a basket of (mixed) fruit.
... I wrote
... I shall write to my lord.
... 5, the Babylonians
... of oxen
Total 2: the palace scribe.
... to the king
... Ionian
I have written ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... the town Riba-Dadi, near Qarnê
x houses in the town of Qurri-duri.
... s of the Elamites ...
... the Babylonians ...
The daughter of Nabû-zēr-kitti-līšir, the granddaughter of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), who is now ill, and on whom the 'hand' of Nanaya of Uruk is being placed in extispicy —
Now, if it is acceptable to the king, my lord, I will send the leftovers of the Inner City to the king, my lord, by the hands of Nadinu, the royal bodyguard.
... &  beer  &  Nabû-ahhe-balliṭ
Moreover, breccia, as much as is needed (for making) burzigallu-bowls, (a stone) that had never been seen before, revealed itself at Kapridargilâ (“Dargilâ Village”).
This (refers to) that Adad thunders when the moon is seen.
Witness Nanî, ditto of Nabû-ašared.
He shall pay the straw and barley at the threshing floor in its original amount. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
or a ... , or a ... , or a worker with the public works, or a horse trainer, or a groom of the stable,
total, the clothing ...
... of A...
... what I saw ...
The emissaries of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, who have been staying in the city of Tyre, have eaten bread and drunk wine in the presence of the emissaries of the king of Egypt, the archers, horses and mules of the king of Assyria, and the archers, horses and mules of the king of Tyre.
the towns of Ṣu...
Witness Kunaya, eunuch of ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Issar-šumu-ereš. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I had a canopy, which rivals the heavens, made from musukkannu-wood, a durable wood. I clad its perimeter with thirty-four talents (and) twenty minas of reddish gold and (thereby) reinforced its bonds.
A tablet of Naṣib-ilu to Nabû-balliṭ, his brother. Good health to my brother! May  Nabû and Marduk bless my brother.
1, chariot driver of the chief eunuch;
Land of the Palil-ites
2 seahs, the 21st day;
From the estate of the palace herald.
... has been done. The lower part is elevated...
servants of Bel-ahhe-riba, the 'third man' of the governor, my lord — NN, the chariot driver, NN, the ... , and NN, the ... — who last year, when I was in GN, appealed to the king, my lord, about ...
(As for) the people of the city Arzâ who had thrown Padî, their king who was bound by treaty and oaths to Assyria, into iron fetters and who had handed him over to Hezekiah of the land Judah in a hostile manner, they became frightened on account of the villainous acts they had committed. They formed a confederation with the kings of Egypt (and) the archers, chariots, (and) horses of the king of the land Meluḫḫa, forces without number, and they came to their aid.
I had a statue of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, my mistress, fashioned from silver and erected in the palace of the city Gaza. I had another statue of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, my mistress, fashioned from silver and erected in the palace of the city Lidu.
Shep-Shamash,
Witness Šamaš-ahu-iddina, physician.
a cup of small onions; a ditto of quinces;
I am now waiting for them. May the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
They have put iron shackles on the hands and feet of Mugallu the Melidean.
... he will take away
Samaria
Month Iyyar (II), 15th day, eponym year of Nabû-šarru-uṣur of Marqasa.
As to what you wrote: "A messenger of Urpala'a came to me for an audience with the Phrygian messenger" — let him come, and  let Aššur, Šamaš, Bel and Nabû command that all these kings should wipe your sandals with their beards! Let them enter into the presence of the Phrygian first, and let him speak kindly with them; afterwards you may come into my presence.
Let the king send a sealed order to ... , and let them fetch and give me the ... which the king promised.
4 basins for washing hands, of silver;
From the lamentation priest Bel-šuma-iškun.
Now, until I ... to the king, ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-reṣuwa. Good health to the king, my lord!
Simbar-Šipak, ... , son of Erišum ... , son of Kitti-... , son of Gurdî, (... ) son of Ubulu, (... ) all (from) the land Ḫalaḫḫu.
before ...
We shall send the (news of) the Urarṭian to the Palace.
11 houses ...
governor of ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "The son of the city lord of  Qudanati ... " —
An estate of 1 hectare of land, a threshing floor, a garden, a well, and a grazing land belonging to Se'-madi, in the village of Urdi —
an estate of 2 hectares of land, including a meadow and an irrigated field;
what he wrote to me ...
Witness Zar-Aššur, son of ...
... the Aramean(s) whom the king my lord sent against the land of ... , saying: "... to the land of Arrapha
strong ...
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord, in charge of my messenger.
The money is paid completely. That ... is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
May Aššur, Šamaš, Nergal and ... , the gods of Assyria and Elam, overthrow your royal dynasty, destroy your name and your seed from the land, and make you live in bondage under your enemy.
I sent ...
Witness NN, ditto of Tušhan.
Seal of Sasî, owner of the ... being sold.
(Palace of) Sennacherib, king of Assyria. Whoever erases my inscribed name (or) places (it) in the service of a god (or another) person, may the deities Aššur, ... , (and) ... make his name (and) his seed disappear.
Tab-shar-Sin, his wife and two daughters, a total of 5;
... Bit-Amukani
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
You offer cooked meat before Belet-ili, make a flour/incense-offering, pour oil, honey, beer and wine, and sing: “Mighty ... of Apsû, wife of Ea, is strong and descends to the netherworld.”
To the king, our lord: your servants, the mayors and elders of Nemed-Laguda. Good health to the king, our lord! May the king, our lord, be well, and may the king, our lord, be happy.
Aššur-rēša-iši, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Mutakkil-Nusku, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-dān (I) (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur:
... I ...
... to the magnates ...
you revive ...
... The coils of the colon are 14 in number...
The goddess Ištar, who (lives) in the city Arbela, which is called Kurbail in the language of the land Ḫatti,
I set Šarru-lū-dāri, son of Rūkibtu, their former king, over the people of the city Ashkelon and imposed upon him the payment of tribute (and) gifts (in recognition) of my overlordship so that he (now) pulls my yoke.
Disregard that they (may) inflict a defeat and plunder their open country...
At that time the temple of the god Aššur, my lord, which was in the area of the ziggurrat of the god Adad-nārārī (I), my forefather, had become dilapidated. I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I completed it from top to bottom. I deposited my monumental inscription.
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
A thigh, a shoulder, ribs, leftovers — the goddess Nanāya.
... the vizier
Total, 1 son of the chief eunuch, of the crown prince.
The commandant of Cutha has 100 (hectares) of arable land in the  province of Isana. I have given him 100 (hectares) of land of Bel-iddina  (as a) replacement... Now his land has been completely  destroyed.
Witness NN, chief ... of the main meadowland.
of ... ya.
... of the land ... ; Ahu-le'i, ... ; NN, ... ; Nabû-šezib, farmer, x persons; ... ;
... his servant: "...
NN and his people
Bel-qate-sabat,
A hat, a scarf, a bedspread: the Inner City.
Witness Sagibî, ditto.
The gall bladder is flattened and is located on its back.
x minas of silver belonging to ... , merchant.
Witness Nergal-šarru-uṣur, chariot driver.
If the moon is surrounded by a black halo: the month holds rain; clouds will be gathered.
In the eponymy of Aššur-daʾʾinanni, son of Tiglath-pileser (I), I marched a second time to the land Ḫanigalbat. I conquered the cities Iānu, Iabli, Anat of the steppe, (and) the city (Ana)-Aššur-(utēr)-aṣbat.
... Nineveh
At that time, in the reign of a previous king, bad omens occurred.
... let them speak
If Jupiter enters the moon: the king will die, and there will be hostility in the land.
And the city-lords around them have fallen ...
Moreover, (as for) Ṣidqâ, the king of the city Ashkelon who had not bowed down to my yoke, I forcibly removed the gods of his father’s house, himself, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his brothers, (and other) offspring of his father’s house and took him to Assyria.
And as to those words that were said to the king, my lord, "They are plotting in the king's presence", I have heard them too, and I swear by the god Aššur, my god, that there is no such thing.
The prince who accepts their gifts, the shepherd who has charge over them, and the herdsman who properly administers them, I:
15 ditto black, 15 ditto irginu-coloured,
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Has the  commander-in-chief's wife (already) come down to them?"
We have sent the salves and fumigants which the king, my lord, ordered.
... into ...
... the town Alikina ... which is on the border of ... I annexed to Assyria (and) placed a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over them.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Inurta-ila'i and his sons, whether his brothers, his nephews or his prefect,
Concerning the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity ...
... the river Uqnû, six stages ...
An estate of 1 hectare 5 decares of land adjoining the king's road, adjoining the field of Kakkullanu, adjoining the field of Marduk-eriba, adjoining the field of Mušezib-Nabû, and adjoining the field of Ibašši-ilu —
Witness Qurdi-Aššur. Witness Šer-išti-Adad, scribe.
From Nergal-eṭir.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to his servant: "The work on the river is a great burden on me; nobody is helping me" —
The word of the king to the recruitment officers of the magnates: I am well; you may be happy. Take care of yourselves, eat bread and drink beer in peace!
If a planet comes close to Regulus: the son of the king who lives in a city on my border will make a rebellion against his father, but will not seize the throne; some son of the king will come out and seize the throne; he will restore the temples and establish sacrifices of the gods; he will provide jointly for (all) the temples.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
I am not ...
Witness Bel-...
Witness Nanî, ditto. Witness Marduk-šakin-šulmi.
Mitinti of the land Ashkelon neglected the loyalty oath (sworn by) the great gods (... and) revolted against me. He (Mitinti) saw the defeat of Raḫiānu (Rezin) (... ) and became afraid, (ii 15') then he abandoned the city Ashkelon and fled to the city Gaza... the city Ashkelon ... my command ... Mitinti ...
... upon
This is its interpretation.
and the revetment of the palace
(As for) Necho, king of the cities Memphis and Sais, Šarru-lū-dāri, king of the city Pelusium, Pi-šan-Ḫuru, king of the city Natho, Pa-qruru, king of the city (Pi)šaptu, (ii 55) Inaros (Niḫerau), king of the city Athribis, (and) Naḫkê, king of the city Heracleopolis, those kings, governors, (and) officials whom the father who had
If at the moon's appearance the left horn becomes long, and the right horn short: the ruler will conquer a land not his own.
From the beginning you have ... guarded my treaty, and not sinned against my favour and oath. And because of these good deeds which you have done, by the gods of the king, your lord, ... to me, the king of Assyria, your lord, ...
1 prayer bowl ditto;
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šar-ahhešu, who guards the 'mule house' at Borsippa. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! I am herewith sending a copy of this letter to the king, my lord, with the message: "They have received it in the presence of the king, my lord."
Witness NN, commander-of-fifty.
1,000 stalks of vine, ... ;
Nergal-apil-kumua,
This year dates in ...
at the disposal of Šer-Issar.
10 ditto, hallam;
(As for) Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II), for whom I had performed many act(s) of kindness (and) whom I had installed as king in the land Elam, who did not honor my treaty (and) sided with Šamaš-šuma-ukīn — (my) hostile brother — Tammarītu rebelled against him and struck him, together with his family, down with the sword.
Let the king, my lord, write me what the king my lord commands.
... you did
Two homers of barley in Kumme belonging to Remanni-ilu, scribe,
If there is a 'weapon'-mark in the top of the left surface of the 'finger,' it is the weapon of the prince. The weapon of the prince will have no equal.
... they abandoned their ... and fled far away. (As for) ... , ... , (and) Irḫulena, (iii 5') ... , who had uttered grievous blasphem(ies) against (the god) Aššur, ... , they flew away like bats (living) in crevices to inaccessible place(s).
Witness Šulmu-ahhe, ditto.
Month Elul (VI), 22nd day, eponym year of Sin-šarru-uṣur, treasurer.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
... I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether NN, son of ... , should go to the aid of ...
... have been plotting
Witness Ṭab-šar-Nabû, scribe.
... of the country of ...
... he is ...
1 piece of abašmu-stone; 1 ... of carnelian;
the town and the forest ...
... have been bought and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments...
If anyone in the future, at any time, whether the brother of Riṣi-ṣurri or his sons or his nephews or his prefect or ... , or any relative of his, or his ... , or his labour-duty superior, or his ... , or his ... , or his ... , or his ... , or his ... , or his ... ,
Witness Nergal-ahu-uṣur, commander-of-fifty of ...
of the Itu'eans ...
... house, ...
3,000 (homers) of wheat;
the governor of ...
... the king, my lord
... of the king ...
One ditto — Šumma Izbu, fowler.
At that time, the armory of Nineveh which the kings who came before (me), my ancestors, had built to maintain the camp (and) to keep thoroughbreds, mules, chariots, military equipment, implements of war, and the plunder of enemies, everything that the god Aššur, king of the gods, gave me as my royal share — that place had become too small for me to have horses show their mettle (and) to train with chariots. I made the people of the lands plundered by my bow take up hoe (and) basket,
Shep-Aššur, ditto of the chief treasurer;
... -ibni
... is not present. The base of the middle 'finger' of the lung is 'loose.' The breast-bone is thick...
10 ... ;
... of the ... s of the Sealand
I have written to the Palace. If I have committed a crime before the king, my lord, let the king, my lord, kill me but I am not guilty of anything before the king, my lord."
The threshing floor, garden, and spring are exempted. That woman is purchased and acquired.
of Halta... and ...
... he has gone ...
5 sheep, 5 bowls (of wine): palace supervisor.
... the lands Namri, ... , Bīt-Sangibūti, ... , Bīt-Ḫamban, ... , Sumurzu, Bīt-Barrūa, ... , Bīt-Zualzaš, ...
... to Marduk-apla-iddina
The king, my lord, knows that I am a poor man, that I keep the watch of the king, my lord, and am guilty of no negligence within the palace. Now I have been deprived of my field. I have turned to the king; may the king do me justice, may I not die of hunger!
I have made the stone thresholds, and am herewith sending them to the king, my lord, with my messenger. They are strong mountain stone (thresholds) which can bear burdens of seven donkeys.
... of the Itu'eans ... have been entrusted to him; he has ... ed them and brought them to the Palace. NN is with him.
And after the Elamites had marched against us and taken control of the bridge, when they came to ... , I wrote to the king, my lord. Now they have dismantled the bridge.
... the forts and the land of the Manneans, the Medes, and the Scythians, which are on the border of Assyria, and (thus) enlarged the territory of Assyria.
Tomorrow the king will hear (about it), and the king will kill me on account of the fact that I have not consumed ... The king will say: "He has eaten oxen, he has consumed sheep." I have eaten nothing (and) consumed nothing. The king, my lord, should know (this).
The palace of Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria.
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also strong king, king of the world, and king of Assyria: property of the temple of the god Aššur.
adjoining the field of NN,
Let the king my lord send a letter to the ... of Borsippa, and let them bring the horses up.
I sent (word) ...
Witness Ninuayu, ...
I/he caused ... to ...
Total 19 gods of the house of Ninurta.
Witness Abunu.
a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
For his life and the well-being of his city he built the wall of Nineveh anew.
NN, royal bodyguard;
... is in front of the gall bladder. The 'finger' is thick...
From Nabû-šuma-iškun.
total, the men from Ṣiṣṣirtu.
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
Witness Šer-balli-ibni.
On my return march, I defeated all together the Tuʾumuna, Riḫiḫu, Yadaqqu, Ubudu, Gibrê, Maliḫu (Malaḫu), Gurumu, Ubulu, Damunu, Gambulu, Ḫindaru, Ruʾuʾa, Puqudu, Ḫamrānu, Ḫagarānu, Nabatu, (and) Liʾtaʾu, insubmissive Arameans. I carried off into Assyria a substantial boot
To the king, my lord: your servant, Nabû-šumu-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord. May ... give ... to the king, my lord.
... Aššur-šumu-kīn
Remutu has contracted and bought them from Zarutî for 1 1/2 minas of silver by the mina of the king.
Shalmaneser, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil and vice-regent of Aššur; founder of cult centers, builder of Ekur, restorer of the shrines of the gods Nabû and Marduk:
... wrote to me
If the Pleiades enter the moon and come out to the north: Akkad will become happy; the king of Akkad will become strong and have no rival.
and the dead ...
Witness Aya-da... , ...
Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the chief eunuch, one who had deserved well of my father and begetter, who had led me constantly like a father, installed me safely on the throne of my father and begetter and made the people of Assyria, great and small, keep watch over my kingship during my minority, and respected my royalty.
5 minas of silver, 5 togas, 5 tunics: the Sartinnu; 1 talent of silver, 10 togas, 10 tunics: the Palace Superintendent;
If you hear any improper, unsuitable or unseemly word concerning the exercise of kingship which is unseemly and evil against Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, either from the mouth of his brothers, his uncles, his cousins, his family, members of his father's line; or from the mouth of magnates and governors, or from the mouth of the bearded and the eunuchs, or from the mouth of the scholars or from the mouth of any human being at all, you shall not conceal it but come and report it to Ass
You make a flour/incense-offering before Sîn, perform a sheep offering, pour oil, honey, beer and wine, and sing: “O Sîn, you are the bright one of the gods, you are the one who lights up the darkness.”
1 pipe ... for ... ;
in all 6 witnesses from Ispallurê.
in all 2 persons, an estate of 10 hectares of land ... , a house, a threshing floor ... —
The governor of Waisi has written to me: "The messenger of the son of Yakin has come to me; he says:
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-šar-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord!
The month Marchesvan (VIII) ...
which he ...
I have sent ... to the Palace. Let the king, my lord,  hear what he has to say.
... came
He said: "I heard that ...
the people of the country ...
The money is paid completely. That field is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The house of Ammi-baʾal, son of Irʾanni-Baʾal, ancestor of the kings of the land Ḫatti.
Witness NN, royal bodyguard.
If the king, my lord, commands, I will go and speak with them; if the king, my lord, commands, I will go where the king, my lord, sends me.
... the prince
... the governor of ...
... I am not guilty of anything ...
The 'cavity' of the left lung is split...
On the 30th of Adar (XII) we activated the (first) part of the (divine) punishment.
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-alik-pani. Good health to the king, my lord!
I exercised authority over the extensive land of Karduniaš (Babylonia) and exercised kingship over it. I made anew a royal statue of myself (and) erected (it) in Esagil, the palace of the gods. I (re)confirmed the regular offerings (in) Esagil (and) the gods of Babylon. I (re-)established the privileged status of Babylon (and) appointed Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, my favorite brother, to the kingship of Babylon in order that the strong might not
2 cuts of shoulder. Of 2 oxen: the stomachs,
Month Tebet (X), 5th day, eponym year of Atar-ili, governor of Dur-Šarruken.
... of Nabû-ahhe-šallim, the chief ...
Sennacherib, ... , ... , the father who had engendered me, ...
The breast-bone is thick...
1, Ša-la-ili-mannu, servant of Ahu-iddina.
... from the day when ...
... to the land Katmuḫu ... the cities ... , Šimu, Tašu... , Sapiku, ... , Aššur-iqīša, Aššur-... , ... , Zarāti, ... , Ḫundur, Ḫašmar, ... , (ii 5') Dūr-Kurigalzu, Dūr-Aššur, Dūr-Enlil, Dūr-Aššur-rēša-iši, Dūr-Ašš
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
3 (cuts of) meat, salted;
Witness Šarru-lu-dari.
In my accession year (and) in my first regnal year, after I nobly ascended the royal throne, with the exalted strength of the great gods, my lords, who go before me, with the ... of the god Aššur, my lord, who goes at my right hand, with the martial spirit of the god Ninurta, who goes at my left hand, I mustered my chariotry (and) troops. Difficult roads, rugged paths, the tracks of the stars of the heavens, routes which were impassable, the paths of the goddess
in the city ...
shall place 10 minas of silver (and) one mina of gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
in all 60 horses and mules, of Banaya, son of Harba... ,  Nabû-ahu-iddina, NN, and NN —
has taken ...
Witness NN, scribe of the crown prince.
To the goddess Ištar, the lady of battle who fully carries out the command(s) of the god Enlil, the one who overwhelms enemies (and) destroys the wicked, the one who marches at front of the gods, (the one) during/in ...
... -nadin-ahi, a servant of the governor of ... and his family are staying on the other side (of the river). Now then, if the king, my lord, commands, ... over to his side.
... this ...
NN, 11 oxen,
The gods on the left of Aššur:
(As for) the one who destroys an inscribed object bearing my name, (the name of) my father, (and the name of) my grandfather, (or) does not place (it) with an inscribed object of his (own), may the gods who reside in heaven and netherworld angrily curse him, overthrow  his kingship, (and) make his name (and) seed disappear from the land.
... to the ...
Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver of the king, has contracted and bought them from Dannaya and from Gabbî-ilu for 14 minas of silver by the (mina) of Carchemish.
2 minas of silver, of his own.
You shall ... nothing ... ,
of the fort ...
17 men,
Witness Tabalayu, ša šēpi guard.
I captured and plundered the people of the city Tumurrum, who live on Mount Nipur, a rugged mountain. I captured and plundered the city Bīt-Tumurrum, their fortified city, together with cities in its environs. (As for) the rest of them, who were not guilty of (any) sin or crime, I imposed the heavy yoke of my lordship upon them.
The front of the base-board, nailed.
... into our presence ...
Those who sin against your father's goodness, your father's and your own treaty, and who plot against your life, shall be placed in your hands, and you shall delete their name from Assyria and from your palace ...
To the king, my lord: your servant, Ašipâ. May Bel and Nabû bless the king, my lord.
I brought out Padî, their king, from the city Jerusalem and placed (him) on the lordly throne over them, then I imposed upon him payment (in recognition) of my overlordship.
Aplaya, an Aramean, a servant of the king, has said to me: "A play of the king's men ... Aplaya and his sons ...
The god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises.
... it is very good ...
... Nu...
... of ...
I, Aššur-etel-ilāni, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Ashurbanipal, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Esarhaddon, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also vice-regent of the god Aššur, descendant of Sargon (II), vice-regent of the god Aššur, (5) who defeated all his enemies (and) hung the corpses of his
... ;
His sons together with the son of ...
... and you will see ...
Witness Šer-abu-uṣur, scribe.
... the 'finger' is wide ...
Witness Addî.
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, then I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, fortified cities, together with the small(er) settlements in their environs (and) the district of the land Bīt-Barrû in its entirety, and I added (this area)
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "On the ... th of Shebat (XI) let ... go to the river and perform the ritual of the 'Lady of the River.' Let the king come into the presence of Aššur after the ritual" —
Saturn (is equivalent to) the moon; it is favorable.
If a planet is red: the enemy's land will be dispersed.
(As for) Nergal-šarru-uṣur, who had taken away the property of Esagil and the citizens of Babylon, (and) had sold the gold (and) silver at market value to the land Elam, I conquered the city Bīt-Imbî, which is in the land Elam, (and) I killed Nergal-šarru-uṣur, (and) I plundered his corpse.
... red, rear part;
Venus is the star of the Westland.
The vertebrae are recessed. First extispicy...
I restored the land Bīt-Yakīn and reorganized (its administration). I settled there people from the land Kummuḫu that I had conquered and I had (them) occupy its (Bīt-Yakīn’s) abandoned regions. I divided up that land into equal parts and assigned (them) to the authority of a eunuch of mine, the governor of Babylon, and a(nother) eunuch of mine, the governor of the Gambulu (tribe).
I have ... ed against you ...
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
The king, my lord, sent me the following order via Šarru-amuranni: "All the men and horses should assemble at your disposal and come with you to the river!"
Witness ... -le'i, ...
The king, my lord, can be glad.
I shall not give ...
Because of the evil which he had done, and to teach future people the might of the gods Aššur, Šamaš, and Marduk, the great gods, my lords, I marched to the land Elam. During my campaign, I conquered and plundered the cities Bīt-Ḫaʾiri (and) Raṣā, cities on the border of Assyria that the king of the land Elam (v 20) had taken away by force in the time of my ancestor(s). I had my warriors enter inside them, (and)
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-rehtu-uṣur. May  Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
At that time, in the reign of a previous king, bad omens occurred in Sumer and Akkad. The people living there were answering each other yes (for) no (and) were telling lies.
Ashurnasirpal, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (II), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur:
and ...
What is this love by which the mother raised her child,
To the king, my lord: your servant Balasî. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Witness Nabû-eriba, deputy.
Witness Handu, servant of Nabû-le'i.
4 wooden ... ;
Witness Ha... ni.
Month ... , xth day, eponym year of Adad-ibni (784 B.C.).
I sent a son of mine to the Palace in Nineveh, to the presence of the king of Assyria; he kissed my feet, and ...
Seal of Adad-ahu-iddina, owner of the people being sold.
among them. The seed of the father's house is strong; he will perish in the land of his enemy ... '
the scepter ...
He said: "...
A tablet of Auriga to the Palace Herald, his lord. Good health to my lord!
He is ... ; as for you, be ready with ... and with ... , until ... comes and gives orders ... "
... Mannu-ki-...
The king, my lord, should quickly send ... to me whatever orders there are; then I shall write to him that they should bring the boats to me. I shall wait for them, and (then) write to the Palace.
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... of the ... eans, and write to them like this: 'If ... has come to you, ... like one who has done ... , and ... like one who has not done ... '" —
Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, has contracted and bought (said property) from these gentlemen for 8 1/2 minas of silver by the mina of the king. He has redeemed (said property) from them.
I have seized the land of Zabban by the command of the vizier, my lord. The people of Assyria are well, the city of Nineveh is well, the queen is well.
... of my lord ...
The bull colossus of Duyanusi is finished and we have loaded it on a boat. Let them write me what the king my lord's orders are.
From Nineveh I marched to the city Arbela ... , (then) I sacrificed at the city gate (the inhabitants of) the cities which I had conquered. I entered the city Arbela. The king of Assyria went out to the steppe (and) killed sheep.
Isana
(As for) Aḫšēri, who did not fear my lordly majesty, (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar placed him in the hands of his servants. The people of his land incited a rebellion against him (and) they cast his corpse into a street of his city. They dragged his body to and fro before the gate of his city.
... the king, my lord
If the rising of Enmešarra is very red: it will increase the flood.
If Venus becomes visible in Sivan (III): the king of the land will fall.
Total: 7, of 1 ...
in all 6 women.
... of the king, my lord,
of the king with the troops ...
... you shall not make peace with him
Witness Bar-... , mayor of Nineveh.
to ...
... came ...
(So) I sent a letter to the vizier, my lord. My messenger was detained for three days, (while) I was waiting for him, and (during) this time the letter of the vizier, my lord, arrived in my hands. I opened it and read it, and it was ... indeed ... the word of the vizier, my lord,
I had foundation inscriptions made of silver, gold, bronze, lapis lazuli, alabaster, basalt, pendû-stone, elallu-stone, (and) white limestone, (as well as) inscribed objects of baked clay, and (then) I depicted on them hieroglyphs representing the writing of my name.
... the whole palace
The base of the 'station' is effaced...
NN and his people, Iglî and his people,
The house of the palace herald has ... ed the ... of the king, my lord. May the king, my lord, (live to) 100 years!
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial audience gift from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
... jar of wine ...
The bed which goes to the Aššur temple in the night
... s of ... of the meal
As for him, the king of the land Elam, he heard about the entry of my troops, who had entered inside the land Elam; he abandoned the city Madaktu, a royal city of his, and (then) fled and took to the mountains (lit. “ascended his mountain”). I surrounded, conquered, destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire the city Madaktu, his royal city, together with cities in its environs. I killed many soldiers among his troops, including his eunuchs and his nobles, (and) carried off captives from them
... I have no ...
sent ...
... I invited inside it (the god) Aššur, the king of the gods, (and) the gods and goddesses living in Baltil (Aššur), (and then) I made splendid offerings before them (of) enormous wild bulls (and) fattened sheep. I held a festival and (thus) made the hearts of the people of my land rejoice. I had the victorious conquests that I achieved over all of (my) enemies with the support of (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar, my lords
... about whom the king, my lord, wrote to his servant: "The servants of the king who are with you — give them provisions!" — the king, my lord, knows that ever since I took the office of the master of the banquet, until now, not a single day has passed without my giving them provisions. Every day, without fail, I give them provisions.
If the Scales' position is stable: there will be reconciliation and peace in the land.
of Pašî ...
I dismantled the outposts that I had constructed against Baʾalu, the king of the land Tyre. By sea and dry land, I opened (all of) his routes, as many as I had seized. I received from him his substantial payment. I turned around (lit. “I turned the front of my yoke”) and returned safely to Nineveh, my capital city.
Witness Ṣil-Aya, cohort commander.
... the name of the great goddess I ...
Concerning the ... about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me,  the merchant who gave it to you ... the merchants ...
10 ditto, hallam;
Witness Šep-Aššur, ...
I have now written to the king, my lord.
Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, who has now written whatever he wishes in this papyrus and placed it before your great divinity, and (whom) your great divinity knows —
2 talents, the royal bodyguard;
... ;
The king of Babylon, the one who renovates Esagil and Ezida, the one who performs good deeds, the just king, the one who makes his people content, the king who provides, the one who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, the capable governor who reveres the lord of lords,
Witness Šep-ahhe.
... his messenger, who had come to me in the land Gambulu, which is across the Tigris River, spoke to me as follows: “... the mighty Medes ... who do not fear the king of Assyria ... they have come to an agreement with one another ... they will divide the land Gambulu between one another... you will not stand (there)”... I said to him: “Who are you, stranger? ... I do not know you. You are not one of those who came before you (and) made peace with one another. You are one of those who have not
I ordered the march to the city Madaktu, his royal city. In the month Ṭebētu (X), bitter cold set in and continuous rain fell, and I was afraid of the snow in the gorges, the outflows of the mountains, (so) I turned around and took the road to Assyria.
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Write down and dispatch to me the names of the ... , and the (names) of their gods" —
... the heart ...
Witness Uqur-tabni.
(As for) the land Patušarri, a district in the area of the salt desert, which is in the midst of the land of the distant Medes, borders Mount Bikni, the lapis lazuli mountain, (iii 5') (and) upon the soil of whose land none of the kings, my ancestors, had walked — I carried off to Assyria Šidir-parna (and) E-parna, mighty chieftains, who were not submissive to (my) yoke, together with their people, their riding horses, oxen,
2 large kettles of copper;
... the Urarṭian(s) ...
From the beginning you have ... guarded my treaty, and not sinned against my favour and oath. You have fallen and died on account of all the messages and orders I have been sending to you. And truly by these recent things that you have done you have surpassed everything.
... the land of Uriakka
The god Aššur, the lord, commanded me to go to Mount Lebanon. I cut down (and) carried off cedar beams for the temple of the gods Anu and Adad, the great gods, my lords. I continued to the land Amurru (and) conquered the entire land Amurru. I received tribute from the city Arwad (and) the lands Byblos (and) Sidon (and) a crocodile (and) a large female monkey of the sea coast. Moving on from the land Amurru I marched to
... of Elam
Does your great divinity know it? Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord?
Disregard the (formulation) of the prayer for today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-belu-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! The city of Der and the fort are well.
he ...
total, ...
The sons of the king, your father, have come up and
... will they plunder what is carried in that ship? Will it come to an engagement, or to a battle? Will the weapons of ... prevail over the weapons of Esarhaddon?
... and
I am also sending to you the Borsippeans who stayed in your presence. Make them take the road to their country and let them come here through the pass of ...
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Witness Nabû-abu-uṣur, ...
Witness Silim-ili.
the town of Sari... ,
... , ... -zeru-iddina ...
NN, horse trainer of the open chariotry;
... of the fortress of ...
... of the road ...
... their words ...
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), capable shepherd, favorite of the great gods, guardian of truth who loves justice, renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the insubmissive, (and) the one who strikes enemies with lightning:
... I sent him ... ; and now his major-domo
(As for) the rest of the Arabs who had fled from (my) weapons, the heroic god Erra struck (them) down. Famine broke out among them and they ate the flesh of their children on account of their hunger. The deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Adad, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Šarrat-Kidmuri, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Nergal, (and) Nusku, the gods who support me
The gods of Subartu.
As he was walking with me, he says to me: "You are an expert in divination? Tell me, why have you not told me the truth? When will you tell me the truth? If you don't tell me the truth, ... "
If a planet in ... rains: the harvest of the land will prosper.
250 archers,
20 minas of black wool;
... and you will see the profit that I will make for you.
Witness ... -zeri, son of Ammâ.
1 seah 1 'litre' of regular offering loaves;
But when I wrote to the king, my lord, ... , he did not send a  reply to my letter.
I brought back all together the chariots along with their horses, whose drivers had been killed in the thick of (that) mighty battle and which had themselves been released so that they galloped about on their own. When the second double-hour of the night had passed, I stopped their slaughter.
4 minas, ...
... the house of ... in the centre of Nineveh, adjoining the house of Ilu-eriba, adjoining the house of ...
The king, my lord, knows that the day I arrive in Dur-Šarruken,
To Nabû, the august heir, son of Marduk, lord of Babylon, his lord: Adad-nārārī, king of the universe, son of Šamšī-Adad (V), king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (III), (who was) also king of the universe, presented (this object) for the sake of his life.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, (or) changed or altered the proceedings...
a ditto of small onions;
... his ... s
Moreover, as for him, the terrifying splendor of (the god) Aššur, my lord, overwhelmed him and he passed away.
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-naṣir. Good health to the king, my lord!
We set out on the 29th and went as far as Šabirešu; the king, my lord, can be glad.
... , ... -zeru-... ;
5 ditto — Il-hananu
I myself prayed to the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl, Nabû, Nergal, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela, the gods who support me, for victory over (my) strong enemy and they immediately heeded my prayers (and) came to my aid.
... to ... for the father of the king ... As for me, ... the brother of the king's men ...
If on the 14th day the moon and sun are seen together: reliable speech; the land will become happy; the gods will remember Akkad favorably.
I asked the carpenters: "Why are the beams so scarce?" They said: "The forest of the shrine of Nergal is cut off; they are bringing  us only the wood of the shrine of Nergal, (which) they are  cutting into shape."
... you to
he will make the silver pay off ...
they give ...
... the sheep of the country ...
Witness Ahabû. Witness Sin-zeru-ibni.
From Dur-Šarruken as far as ... , from ... as far as Mazamua, from Mazamua as far as Dur-Šarruken ...
The palace of Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I), king of Assyria: booty of the city Ḫumuṭ.
If there is (even) one single person left in the whole country whom the king my lord has left in my care, I swear by Bel and Zarpanitu that I shall not let a (single) person escape from my hands!
1 goose, 1 duck, 10 turtledoves.
To the king, my lord: your servant Akkullanu. Good health to the king,  my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
From Nabû-šuma-iškun.
Palace of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria.
Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
I surrounded their (the palace rooms’) lower courses with slabs of breccia (and) alabaster, and large limestone slabs (and) made (them) an object of wonder.
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also strong king, king of the world, (and) king of Assyria; valiant man who acts with the support of Aššur, his lord, and has no rival among the princes of the four quarters, marvelous shepherd, fearless in battle, might
The lady NN, the governess of the central city (harem), has contracted and bought (said property) from Remanni-Adad, chief ... , for ... as a wife.
Witness Bel-...
I performed an extispicy...
The royal bodyguard whom Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, your lord, sent to you with the letter — he has come to you with the letter of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, your lord. Give him a horse and send him on his way. As soon as he has gone out of my presence, have him brought in again by your messenger, and give him this sealed order which I am sending to you by the hand of this messenger of yours.
God Aššur, great lord, ... ; god Anu, ... ; god Enlil, lord of the lands, ... ; god Ea, ... ; god Sîn, lord of the lunar disk, ... ; god Adad, canal inspector of heaven and earth, ... ; god Šamaš, judge of heaven and earth, ... ; god Marduk, lord of orchards, ... ; god Ninurta, warrior of the Igīgū and Anunnakū gods, ... ; god Nergal, perfect one, ... ; god Nusku, bearer
The one who has gathered to himself (all of) the lands and their extensive rulers, who has made all of the settlements bow down at his feet and who has become lord over the entirety of the land of the Qutu as far as the border of Nairi and the land of the Papḫu, the entirety of Mount Kašiiari as far as the border of Elam, all of Chaldea as far as the border of Babylon, all of the land of Sumer and Akkad as far as the border of Egypt, all of the lands of the Šubaru
From Nabû'a of Assur.
... Nergal-naṣir
Witness ... -ilu, eunuch.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did you not write to me (about the matter)?" I wrote to the palace supervisor, but he did not send a reply.
Nabû-le'i, ... ; 2 women; a total of 3 people.
Nabû-naṣir, staff-bearer;
total, 10 ... ;
If an anomaly has a bump in its back and it faces the base of the 'finger,' and its back is smashed: the king will rule the land wherever he turns; wherever he turns he will rule the land.
There is a hole in the left of the gall bladder which faces the base of the 'finger.'
... your ...
Witness Zarutî, scribe.
Witness Ahu-illika, chief of the replacements.
The vizier, my lord, should know (this)...
Let the king, my lord, write to his servant that I should buy and eat one donkey in Nineveh, and the other one in Calah.
Sukkaya;
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
(As for) the people who had incited Šamaš-šumu-ukin, (my) hostile brother, (so that) he performed this evil deed, who feared death, whose lives were precious to them, and who did not fall into the fire with Šamaš-šumu-ukin, their lord, (and) those who had escaped the cut of an iron dagger, famine, starvation, (iv 5') (and) raging fire, (and) had taken refuge — the net of the great gods, my lords,  from which there
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), the one who fashioned image(s) of the deities Aššur, ... , Sîn, Šamaš, Adad, Nergal, Ištar of Bīt-Kidmuri, ... (5) ... the great gods, I: With limestone, stone from the mountains, I had the akītu-house of the steppe built anew and I raised (it) as high as a mountain.
the stomachs, livers, kidneys, hearts.
The king, my lord, can be glad.
In the time of Aššur-nādin-ahhē, king of Assyria.
The king of Elam heard about the capture of his fort and fear fell upon him. He brought the rest of the people of his land into fortresses. The messenger of the king, my lord, should not go to him, until ...
... my messenger
As to Nabû-aplu-iddina ... , the ... of the king, my lord, about whom my lord wrote to me: "He should be exempt" —
To the king of the lands, my lord: your servant NN. May DNN bless the king, my lord!
This (omen) is from before Aššur.
Now I have written to open your ears; be very attentive until I have more time.
(As for) the exalted chariot, the vehicle of the god Marduk, the pre-eminent one among the gods, the lord of lords, I completed its feature(s) with gold, silver, (and) precious stones. I gave (it) as a gift to the god Marduk, the king of the totality of heaven and netherworld, the one who overwhelms my enemies.
adjoining the house of Man-ki-Issar-le'i,
The judgement which the king's subjects made:
(Property) of Rīmūt-ilī, son of Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria.
(When) the ... s of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria,
On the 28th of Tishri (VII), when the moon was seen together with the sun, its interpretation was as follows: The king of Akkad will extend the life; the days of the king of Akkad will be long; there will be stability in the throne of the king of Akkad; the king of Akkad will reach his goal.
10 shoots (of sesame);
He has seized the house of my lord's servants and turned them into his own servants.
From Ašaredu.
I have heard that the servants of Šarru-emuranni,  the governor of Nippur, have sold all the slaves that the king, my lord, gave to  me at the threshing floor of Nippur. When I wrote to the commandant, he did  not give them back to me. The king, my lord, should know (this).
... the king should not say: "He is a citizen of Babylon; he has the usufruct of the corn taxes of the country." Let the king seize the servants of the gods and give them to his ... , so they will fear God.
14 (tablets of) commentaries, ... ,
20,000 stalks of vine near the city of Harran;
A flock of sheep belonging to the chief cook, at the disposal of the servants of the palace.
I have performed the extispicy according to the method of the series.
... , ... -... , NN, NN, NN,
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad; the one who (re)constructed the temple of the god Aššur, (re)built Esagil and Babylon, completed all of the cult centers, renewed the statues of the great gods, (and) who returned the plundered gods of the lands to their (proper) place from Assyria; who plated Egašankalama, the temple of the goddess Ištar of Arbela
Chief of the shepherds, of the cohort commander of the royal bodyguard.
Witness Nabû-ahhe-iddina, baker.
He seats the chanters.
The son of Daltâ of the land Ellipi, a servant who belonged to the king, my lord, has come to my presence. I asked him: "Why did you come now? The ... of the king, my lord, is ... "
The god Ninurta, the son of the god Enlil, the one who loves my priestly service, gave to me the wild beasts and commanded me to hunt. I killed 300 lions from my ... chariot with my wildly vigorous assault with the spear. I killed 200 wild bulls with my lordly assault with the spear. I killed 100 ostriches like caged birds.
the forts ...
... of the governor of Til-Barsip
Witness Didî.
2 jerboas;
The day when (the moon) was seen, there were clouds.
a bowl of haršu (and mixed) fruit. A flagon of ... -beer;
... that you have done is good for me ...
the governor of Calah ...
Qarhâ, son of Marduk-apla-iddina, ditto; 1 woman: a total of 3 people.
1 ... -garment, 1 robe, 1 ... -garment of Bel-eṭir, the ... ,
Witness Puṭi-še.
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), capable shepherd, favorite of the great gods, guardian of truth who loves justice, renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the insubmissive, (and) the one who strikes enemies with lightning:
I have sent ... to the king, my lord; he will bring (them) to the Palace.
The bread of the House of Aššur is excellent. The guard of the House of Aššur is well. The palace herald, my lord, can be happy.
1 (for) 2, the scribe(s).
Witness Mušezib-Aššur, ...
... his son, his son's son,
... by the hand of a god
Witness Se'-ila'i, ditto.
Palace of Sargon (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods.
You know that my heart is with Assurbanipal ...
... set ...
... the king gave us orders: "Receive regular horses and give them  to Dadî! Also receive the king’s horse!" Until now no royal bodyguard  has come to us, and we have no authority over the horses at all.
... Šumu-ukin, son of the rab sikkāti
Under the protection of Aššur, my lord, I marched to the land Ḫanigalbat. I conquered the cities Nagītu, (iii 15) Nagītu-diʾbina, Ḫilmu, Pillatu, Ḫupapanu, Nabātu, Tēma, Ša-iṣṣur-Adad, Maḫra, (iii 20) Ša-karabūa, Ša-ḫīnin-Aššur, Ša-šēik-
... they are transporting to Babylon
NN, chariot driver of the palace ... ;
Our brothers, the chief of trade and the chief of stores have been appointed to the office of prefect, and their brothers have been appointed to the office of recruitment officer. As for us, we have been appointed to the office of prefect of the crown prince.
... to the citizens of Assur, to the temple steward, to the ... , to the baker, to the brewer, to the ... and to the Assyrian Igīgū gods, who dwell in Assyria.
... before ...
... their men are running away
You shall not try to revoke or undo (this) oath ... ; you shall neither think of nor perform a ritual to revoke or undo this oath. You and your sons to be born in the future will be bound by this oath concerning Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, from this day on until what(ever) comes after this treaty. You shall not speak words of rebellion and insurrection against him, nor make common cause with his enemy. If you should sin against this
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me:
... Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, who is now intent on sending ... where the ... eans are located.
Yatamâ, Arzâ, Babâ, Tartiba, NN, in all 5 persons, servants of NN —
... who to the mother ...
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments...
Witness Aplu-uṣur.
Dari-šarru, farmer, 5 persons; Kul-ba... , farmer, x persons; NN, farmer, 5 persons;
Month of Adar (XII), 12th day.
they killed him ...
... the breast-bone is ... and ...
The lady Nanî, my sister, is very well.
... I rebuilt and completed (it) from its foundations to its crenellations... I strengthened its foundations more than previously... (rev. 10) Inside it, I made a royal palace ... my lordly residence ...
in the city of Arbela ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, (or) has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šarru-emuranni. Good health to the king, my lord!
From Nergal-eṭir.
... I am a servant
4 ditto of olives, of Barzib.
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Shamash-naṣir, the scribe of the king, my lord, has written (this) letter.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Mannu-ki-Ninua, his sons and grandsons, shall pay 10 minas of silver. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Month Iyyar (II), 28th day, eponym year of Aššur-naṣir.
3 ditto, ditto, the front red, of the port, ... ;
Witness Inurta-isse'a.
20 turtledoves.
... the fumigants
They are making ... and ... , and are coming to the king, my lord.
... the forts ...
... the xth day;
They should be of cedar. The palace of Adad-apla-iddina, son of ... , overseer.
Concerning the people of Maniye whom you killed, I did give you orders like this: "You shall not kill a single man among them nor take booty from them." But you disregarded my kind words and sided with Natnu. That is why I sent Natnu a messenger with you, telling him: "Make peace with them!"
They said: "We shall go by the road inside the country (= Assyria)." I said: "That is exactly what I ordered you (to do)."
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the ... th day of this month, the month Iyyar (II), to the ... th day of the month Sivan (III) of this year,
Bel-aplu-iddina, son of Babilayu, servant of Nabû-šarru-uṣur.
This is from the 'party' of Nabû.
... very
If a planet ... in the sky: ... will rule the land.
The 5th day ...
NN, bodyguard of the crown prince;
... as follows:
who ... to the presence
The lady Tabūa, who ... in the square of Nineveh, in front of the gods ... ,
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur, eunuch of the governor.
Son of Iqīša-Marduk, nešakku-priest of the god Aššur, descendant of an enduring lineage,
Witness Ṭuri-Issar, chariot driver ...
Total, of Adad-remanni, the cohort commander.
The 'well-being' is raised.
... in good health ...
... or a ...
In the future, may a later prince, when that palace becomes old and dilapidated, restore it. May he anoint with oil my monumental inscriptions, make sacrifices, (and) return (them) to their places. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers...
Month of Tebet (X), 8th day, eponym year of Bel-Harran-šadû'a (650).
To the king, my lord: your servant PN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Bel and Nabû bless the king, my lord.
where ... is good.
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether from this day, the ... th day of this month, the month Iyyar (II), to the ... th day of the month ... of this year, the term stipulated for the performance of (this) extispicy —
... Aššur-šarrani ...
I am herewith sending to the king, my lord, NN, son of RN, the scribe who wrote the previous letter.
NN, farmer, and his people.
Marduk-šumu-uṣur, Naṣiru, Tabnî,
Son of Nabû-apal-iddin, the šandabakku (governor of Nippur), descendant of Ḫanūnu of the land Dēr, one of an enduring lineage,
the staff-bearers ...
Abu-ila'i;
... to the presence
The money is paid completely. That ... is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
I, Ninurta-kudurrī-uṣur, governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, the chosen one, whom the deities Šamaš and Adad, ... the exalted gods, ... in the month Ulūlu, the month of the king of the gods, ...
... if he, having planned, sends him, and he sets up camp against the city ... , will he ... ?
they are mutually paid off ...
As to the news of Bel-iqiša, a messenger of the Medes whom the king, my lord, sent to me, saying: "Speak kindly with him!" — I spoke kindly with him.
Concerning the troops about which the king, my lord, wrote to me,  saying: "Let them go with you" —
If the moon becomes visible in Tebet (X) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour Subartu; a foreigner will rule the Westland.
... with Urda-...
They are taking it as a loan. It shall increase by a fourth.
When the goddess Ištar, mistress of the lands, looked happily (upon him) and he sat on the throne of the father who had engendered him, the goddess Ištar said to him: “May it be so that whatever you write in the documents (and) place (them) before my great divinity, I will have mercy (on you and) will forgive your sins.”
... have not done ...
... ditto, white;
2 talents, ditto, of the port;
4 minas of silver belonging to Inurta-ila'i, at the disposal of Dadî, son of Nergal-apil-kumu'a, at the disposal of Il-idri, son of Hasabu.
If a fog rolls in Shebat (XI): eclipse of the Kassites.
Seal of Šamaš-... ,
Whoever seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Šumma-ilani, his sons (or) his grandsons ...
writing-board ...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Nabû-eriba or his governor, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Šumma-ilani, shall pay 10 minas of silver.
Ilu-... , ... ;
Witness (blank).
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me, it was indeed the third year since they left (their) work and did not pick up (their) tools, (so) it is not surprising that they are now coming to me. They say: "We have been sent to pick up the tools of the master builder, but nobody has given (them) to us."
May he allow my hands to grasp the righteous scepter that enlarges the land (and) the fierce staff that humbles the unsubmissive; may they cause my weapons to rise up so that I may kill my enemies; (and) may he allow me to stand over my enemies in victory (and) triumph.
You have turned your faces towards me.
Concerning ... about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
On my second campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me and I marched to the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians, who since time immemorial had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors. In the high mountains, difficult terrain, I rode on horseback and had my personal chariot carried on (men’s) necks. In very rugged terrain I roamed about on foot like a wild bull.
king of the world,
I put to the sword the population of the city Ḫirimmu, a dangerous enemy, and I did not spare a single one. I hung their corpses on poles and placed (them) around the city. I reorganized that district (and) imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the gods of Assyria, my lords.
of Assyria ...
The king, my lord, wrote to me: "Write to the chief judge about it." I have written to him, and he is looking into it.
Witness Barruqu, ditto.
and ...
... he is ...
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
... are getting up
... the servant of Ubru-ili
a house, a field, and a garden
The 17th day: at the disposal of Ṣalam-šarri-iqbi.
8 females, 5 maids,
... is well.
... of the king will come into the presence of the king.
Šumma-ilu, ... ;
8 (cuts of) meat ... ;
Witness Sukkaya.
... the king, my lord, ...
Witness Aššur-šumu-uṣur.
... the land Nagītu ... which previously had paid tribute to my forefathers, in the time of Aššur-rēša-iši (I), my father, had withheld his annual delivery of tribute and ... had sent his messengers (with messages) hostile to Assyria to Mitâ, king of the land Musku, and had made common cause with him. (As for) the people of the land Nagītu who had sided with him, (iii 5') they joined in the revolt against Assyria and were ready to do battle. With
I gave ...
If at the appearance of the moon the sting of Scorpius surrounds it like a halo: the king will capture his enemy's land.
... of the house of NN
Tabni-naplis, son of Ba...
the town of Nargâ and ...
... all ...
An estate of 2 decares of throne land, adjoining the king's road and the farm of Kakkullanu;
Later on, I will write to my lord how the situation is. Right now ...
Moreover, (as for) Ṣidqâ, the king of the city Ashkelon who had not bowed down to my yoke, I forcibly removed the gods of his father’s house, himself, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his brothers, (and other) offspring of his father’s house and took him to Assyria. I set a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over the city Ashkelon (and) (re)named it Kār-Bēl-mātāti.
I will bring the ... of the king, my lord, and ...
From Balasî.
Ditto; just as a bird is caught by a trap, so may they deliver you, your brothers and your sons into the hands of your enemy.
I have heard what my sister wrote to me; I did not know that my sister was well. Now, may my sister be well!
x cans of beer;
... I am (now) sending to the king, my lord, the Itu'eans who are in my presence, together with their ... I shall bring the ... with them. The Itu'eans who are in my presence have (already) come a long journey. They have crossed the River ... , which was in flood, and come as far as Šabirešu. There are many men ... in Šabirešu, and they are doing work there.
May the great gods of the heavens and earth let the king, my lord, live forever!
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, wise prince, circumspect ruler, shepherd of the people, (and) leader of a widespread population, I:
The lady NN, who is placed before your great divinity, who is now ill and on whom the 'hand' of Nanaya of Uruk is being placed in extispicy —
The king who accepts their gifts, the shepherd who has charge over them, and the herdsman who properly administers them, I:
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhe.
... the son of the king ...
Adad-nerari (III), overseer, son of Šamši-Adad (V), overseer, son of Shalmaneser (III), likewise overseer.
As for Min(u)ḫimmu of the city Samsimuruna, Tu-Baʾlu of the city Sidon, Abdi-Liʾti of the city Arwad, Ūru-Milki of the city Byblos, Mitinti of the city Ashdod, (ii 55) Būdi-il of the city Bīt-Ammon, Kammūsu-nadbi of the land Moab, Aya-rāmu of the land Edom, all of the kings of the land Amurru, they brought extensive gifts
... Witness Mar-...
Witness Ša-la-mašê, priest of Ninurta.
The palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of the universe, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of the universe; property of the palace.
... and when ...
... the Arameans of the king, my lord, are ...
... your ... s
I am ...
(As to) the stored grain of the Nabateans of which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "How much stored grain is there?" — there is (only) one seah of stored grain.
Ninurta-kudurrī-uṣur, son of ... , son of Šamaš-rēša-uṣur.
I worked on the dead ones until late at night. I took out the rotten parts of the dead ones, did the cutting and piling up, (and) burned many brushwood pyres. I cut out the rotten parts of the living ones, piled up the rest of the living ones on ... s, and fed them to the fire. I worked on the living ones (and) on the dead ones simultaneously.
An estate of x hectares of land adjoining ... and the road to  the village of ...
In the west the Assyrians ...
If the moon at its appearance ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... of the head
Witness Zar-Issar.
in accordance with the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord, and your favorable decisions, should the subject of this query, Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, strive and plan, and send ... ? If he, having planned, sends him,
To the king, my lord: your servant Inurta-belu-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord!
... "Let me send my messenger to inquire about the well-being of the king, my lord, and ...
Witness Sia-Aššur, grand vizier.
I will not let ... live ...
... the land Araziaš ...
Month Iyyar (II), 5th day, eponym year of ...
... the house of Ilu-iṣṣur
Witness Nabû-eṭir, chief of the public works.
The maid of the governor of Calah —
10, 8, total 22 — ... ;
Witness Inurta-šumu-uṣur, scribe.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nadin-šumi. Good health  to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk greatly bless the king, my lord!
The palace of Adad-nārārī, king of the universe, son of Arik-dīn-ili, king of Assyria: (brick) belonging to the forecourt of the House of the labūnu.
2 black horses,
The praises of my power which I had heard from the mouth of the great gods ...
The money is paid completely. That land is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... their ... s, and the captives of ... have come in.
Seal of Se'-buna, owner of the woman being sold.
The house of Aššur, the king's temple, whose builder the king had finished but had not decorated: I decorated (it) from top to bottom. I made a colossal royal statue of myself (and) wrote thereon (a description of) my royal victories.
As to what you wrote: "When you sent your messenger to the son of Yakin, the latter seized the messenger and took him to the Palace. The messenger told me: 'The son of Yakin is dead'" —
Month Iyyar (II), 20th day, eponym year of Nabû-šar-ahhešu, governor of Samaria.
... Aya-rame ...
... I have ... ed ... in the city of Til-Barsip. The horses ...
5 urnutu-garments, ... , for the review ... ;
From Adad-šumu-uṣur.
... the governors ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ra'im-nišešu. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord.
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the city ... , their royal city.
... I said: "You will not proceed against him ... "
Ninurta-iddin, his two sons, his wife, his two daughters, total 5 persons, servants of Šumma-ilani —
2 ... ;
Whoever changes, neglects, violates, or voids the oath of this tablet and transgresses against the father, the lord, (and) the treaty of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, his lord, and breaks its entire oath, or whoever discards this treaty tablet of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, his lord, or whoever removes the statues of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, his lord, or whoever ... s this treaty of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, his lord
... the cow of his heifer
40 years Ashur-nerari king of Assyria.
x, deputies, scribes;
On the 21st day he may go down to the river.
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
6, 7, 7, 6 — (province of) Sam'al.
81 82 ... , 83 ... : the palace herald.
If the moon and sun are in balance: reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
... s of the fort
230 bales of straw according to the seah of 8 'litres' belonging to Bahianu, at the disposal of the citizen of Nineveh, Aššur-reṣuwa.
Let the king, my lord, send (word) so that they will bring the ... of the temple scribe ...
Month Tebet (X), 25th day, eponym year of Mannu-ki-Adad.
They are waiting for me ...
... huzunu, remanni-Adad, NN,
... I sent my messenger to Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II) regarding these matters. He detained the eunuch of mine whom I had sent (Marduk-šarru-uṣur) to inquire about his well-being and did not give a reply to my word(s). (10') Ummanigaš ... had the temples of the city Bīt-Imbî ... He brought before him ... of the land Elam. He ... the city Bīt-Imbî, ... , (and) the cities ... ,
... there ... the king, my lord, ...
I had a stele made, had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, written on it, and I erected (it) on the plain of the city Ḫalulê. I had all the lands conquered by me with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, written on it, and I placed (it) before the god Aššur, my lord.
Amriya, ditto;
The word(s) of (the god) Aššur and the goddess Mullissu, which I had spoken to him, he had remembered; (viii 1) at the prompting of my own heart, I mustered my troops and ordered the march to the land Elam. He heard about the advance of my expeditionary force, fear overwhelmed him, and he returned to his (own) land. (viii 5) I entered his palaces (and) carried off his substantial booty. I marched to the city Bīt-Imbî, his fortified city,
Marduk-shaduni,
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Eltekeh (and) Tamnâ. I approached the city Ekron and I killed the governors (and) nobles who had committed crime(s) and hung their corpses on towers around the city; I counted the citizens who had committed the criminal acts as booty; (and) I commanded that the rest of them, (those) who were not guilty of crimes or wrongdoing, (to) whom no penalty was due, be allowed to go free.
Nabû-... , ditto; 1 son; 1 woman; 1 ... ;
Witness Šulmu-ahhe.
3 shekels of silver belonging to Bahianu, at the disposal of Ubru-Adad.
Total 11 ... ;
Witness Nanî.
The land of the king is well; the forts are well.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ululayu. The best of health to the king, my lord! Assyria is well, the temples are well, all the king's forts are well. The king, my lord, can be glad indeed.
... the land of ...
... of the Hittite
I shall send ...
... , saying:
... the river ... to the land ... ri ... ri ... ri ... ri ... ri ... ri ... ri ... (5') ... ri ... ri ... ri ... ri ... ri ... ri ... ri ... ri ... ri ... ri ... ri ... ri ...
5 mares:
He (Nabû-... ) has ... ed 100 (hectares) of the ... eans, 200 of the Arameans, and x of the Halzeans, and has given them to the ... s of ... , the Arrapheans, and the Itu'eans."
... the Enlil of the gods
I will bring the boats to you."
The king, my lord, knows that the day I arrive in the king my lord's presence, I  (must) come back here posthaste!
Witness ... -ahhe.
The Arzabian(s) ...
May the god Adad, the canal inspector of heaven and earth, the canal inspector of the underworld, strike your land with terrible lightning (and) afflict your land with want. May the gods ... in your midst.
Witness Nabû-šumu-iddina, scribe, keeper of the contract.
... let them settle
The ... of ...
... Nabû-ša-ṣalli, NN, NN,
... to the stronghold of ...
... Aššur-šallim to ...
I have written to the king, my lord, the gist of the words which I have heard. The scribe of the palace supervisor has given me no order; (all) I have is the word of the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should send a royal bodyguard to settle (the matter) between us. If the king, my lord, (wishes) to give (me) a field, let the king, my lord, give me a field in return for the field of the palace supervisor. If not, I shall do as Aššur and my gods enable me
before the gods ...
total — Issar-gimilli-libbi.
If the moon is surrounded by a halo, and Regulus stands in it: in that year women will give birth to male children.
The city Kišesim.
Seal of Sasî, owner of the man being sold.
(whether) they will attack, kill, plunder ... ,
... I invited ... to my palace... I offered before them ... (and) fattened fat-tailed sheep. I held a festival ... (and) I had (my servants) drench their (the guests’) heads with fine oil (and) perfumed oil... I had (my servants) drench their (the guests’) heads with fine oil (and) perfumed oil...
(the ruler) of Moab, ...
From Munnabitu.
Ulūlu (VI), twenty-first day, eponymy of Bēlšunu, palace overseer (648*).
adjoining ... —
among the captives whom ...
Witness Ubru-Nabû, keeper of the tablet.
The new regular offerings which the king imposed on me — for (the god) Aššur, the goddess Mullissu, the New Gods, the City Gods, the gods of the Akitu Chapel and the gods of the Šaššūgu Chapel — are now being provided by the town of Ša-Aššur-dubbu.
To the king, my lord: your servant, the chief scribe. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord.
Belat-ekalli, Ištar-kudnittu, Ištar-ninevittu, the Fates, the Sons-of-Truth, Šarrat-eqi, the Twins, Fire, Nabû, Tašmetu, Kutatati, Tittu, the gods of Subartu, the gods of Ekur, the gods of Nippur, the gods of Enuha:
Witness Hiriṣayu.
The lord of kings should ... the corps of NN; perhaps they will find out something useful ...
... Esaggil and Babylon ...
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Zazaya,
Witness NN, the man in charge of the equipment.
owner of the ... being sold.
If at the moon's appearance its right horn becomes long, and its left horn short: the enemy's right hand will capture the enemy's left hand.
2 seahs 5 litres of flour, a bowl of oil: monthly  offering of the second day.
(Property) of Šamaš-balassu-iqbi, the ša rēši of the king.
Palace of Sennacherib, king of Assyria: (This is) the audience gift that Karib-il, king of the land Saba, presented to me. Whoever places (it) in the service of a god (or another) person (or) erases my inscribed name, may the deities Aššur, ... , Šamaš, (and) Adad make his name (and) his seed disappear.
... by the Inner City
It is true that Nabû-ahu-iddina has sold ... to them, but I have bought all the ... s from him for 1 1/2 minas of silver.
an estate of 1 hectare 5 decares adjoining Marduk-ereš and Sin-šumu-uṣur;
We kept watch on the 29th day; we saw the moon. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king my lord!
in all, 6: the 'residences' of ...
... his city will be delivered to him.
At the beginning of my kingship, I brought about the defeat of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Me­ro­dach-ba­la­dan), king of Karduniaš (Babylonia), together with the troops of (the land) Elam, his allies, in the plain of Kish. In the midst of that battle he abandoned his camp, fled alone, and (thereby) saved his life. I seized the chariots, horses, wagons, (and) mules (i 20') that he had abandoned in the
to Ilu-...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-metu-uballiṭ. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord.
... of the son of Yakin
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-belu-taqqin. Good health to the king, my lord!
Four minas of silver, three togas, three tunics: the Chief Confectioner;
The ... :
... here ...
10 ... garments ... , (with) edging ... ;
... of sissoo-wood;
Month Elul (VI), 20th day, eponym year of Mannu-ki-Aššur-le'i.
my lord wrote ...
... he (the king of Elam) ... I sent ... to him, saying: “Let him lead the people of ... here and settle them in their abandoned places.” He did not agree to send them ...
... the town of the Muškannu
... the god ...
... the babylonians say ...
Concerning the lapis lazuli about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "It was lying on the ground; you picked it up and carried it off" — the king, my lord, knew that I am always on the alert and that I do not neglect my guard.
... we wrote
... 20 hectares ... ;
... Assyria ...
You sing, “O Lord and King, you sit in the assembly of the gods.” You invoke their names, “Lord and King, creator of everything,” “Enlil, exalted one, father of the gods,” “Anu, king of the Igīgū and Anunnakū gods,” “Ea, king of the apsû, lord of wisdom,” “Sîn, bright lord, lord of brilliance,” “Šamaš, judge of heaven and underworld,” “Adad, canal inspector of heaven and earth,” “Marduk, sage of the gods
On my fourth campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me and I marched to the land Bīt-Yakīn. In the course of my campaign, I defeated Šūzubu (Mušēzib-Marduk), a Chaldean who lives in the marshes, at the city Bittūtu. (iii 55) As for him, terror of doing battle with me fell upon him and his heart pounded. He fled alone like a lynx and his (hiding) place could not be found.
Witness Ilu-šumu-ibni, chariot fighter.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
... upon ...
Witness Aššur-...
I carried off to Assyria his palace women, his courtiers, male singers, (and) female singers and I made (them) bow down at my feet.
The treaty of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, with Abi-yate', son of Te'ri, king of the land Gurgum,
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial audience gift from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
... the moat ...
... like my own personal attendant. I gave orders to them to support (and) aid the kings (and) governors, servants who belonged to me, (and) I made them stand by their side... I gave orders to them to bring about the defeat of Egypt ... the desert ... they carried out the command(s) of the god Aššur, my lord, and ...
My father, who was more attentive and circumspect than all (other) kings, used to speak like this: "I want for nothing in the land of Akkad and all the lands." Whether ... or not, this was the way he used to speak.
4 litres of honey ...
Witness Sime-Aššur, horse trainer.
... mu
The king of Babylon, my lord, can be very glad indeed. The prefects and the delegates of Cutha, Sippar and Hursagkalama, whom the king, my lord, appointed in the service of the great gods, have taken the oaths (sworn) by the great gods.
From Rašil the older, servant of the king.
Total, of the commander-in-chief.
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... I gave to the lord of lords ...
130 ... ;
“You, the divine lady of ladies, the goddess of war, the lady of battle, the advisor of the gods — her ancestors — the one who speaks good thing(s) about me before (the god) Aššur — the father who had engendered you — (so that) at the glance of his pure eyes he desired me to be king — with regard to Teumman, the king of the land Elam (v 115) who placed a burden on (the god) Aššur — the king of the gods, the father who had engendered you —
May the king, my lord, send a bodyguard with me, so I can settle (the matter) with them in the king's presence. I have tried to speak with them, but they have not listened to me. May the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
Month Adar (XII), 7th day, eponym year of Abi-ram, grand vizier.
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur.
as I have heard ...
A tablet of Bel-bani to the palace superintendent.
He shall return the money tenfold to its owners.
The stone weighted 20 minas and 10 shekels according to the king's (standard).
Concerning the report about which the king, my lord, wrote to me, I have inquired and investigated, and this is what I have found: A Šubrian trooper captured the eunuch of the queen mother, my lady, (and) sent him to the Palace.
... my ... s
Tribute from the land of the people of Unqu.
It is not a fastened ...
Shalmaneser, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (I), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Arik-dīn-ili, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Enlil-nārārī (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of Ašš
I have appealed to the king, my lord, concerning the matter of the ... s who are here. They are 100 in number and all Nabateans. The king, my lord, should give an order that they should bring (them) here.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, have changed or altered the proceedings, or jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
the woman NN, his maid, ... , his two sons,
... his help ... they seized and ... they put their trust in ... a chariot fighter of mine whom I had sent to the land ... they were alone ... they fled ... to the land Nairi ...
May my lord write to me what the king commands!
they are very ...
... their ... s
... the king ...
The governor of ... has 100 men ... ; the commander-of-fifty of the cavalry has 100 men ... ; the entire cavalry of the house of the governor of Calah has x men ...
... they killed ...
Disregard that ... they will change or abandon ...
As to the Arameans about whom my lord wrote me: "They should be made to cross over (the river)!" —
Your servant Nabû-bel-šumate: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: I have sent my messenger to greet the king, the horses and the soldiers.
O king, my lord! I (alone) out of the entire house of my father am bounding about like a dog.
... of ... , when
A tablet of Aššur-zeru-ibni to Nergal-eṭir. Good health to my brother!
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord!
x hectares of field in the village of Luqimama, adjoining the field of Aya-yababa, the field of Zeru-ukin, and the field of Nabû-šallimšunu;
Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
... the king, our lord
Witness Basnî, scribe.
... the men who were taken away
of ...
... , saying: "The son of Bel ...
The messenger whom I sent to you ...
Month ... , 1st day, eponym year of Sin-šarru-ibni.
(As for) the people of the land Akkad who had not escaped my weapons, they were confined inside their cities. (viii 10'') (As for) the leaders of the land Akkad, including Šamaš-šuma-ukīn — (my) unfaithful brother — and (the people of) the land Elam, who had thrown off the yoke of (the god) Aššur (and) held me in contempt, they were terrified by my fierce weapons. (viii 15'') They abandoned their cities and fled to
I plundered the city Arzâ, which is in the district of the Brook of Egypt, and threw Asuḫīli, its king, into fetters and brought (him) to Assyria. I seated him (text: “them”), bound, near the citadel gate of (the city of) Nineveh along with bear(s), dog(s), and pig(s). I threw the ... of Egypt into the River Ḫusir.
in the temple ...
... me ...
It shall increase by a fourth.
I have written to the commander-in-chief. If he wishes, he may inspect the work. I am doing the work.
May Marduk, the Enlil of the gods, the sage of the gods, the lord of oracles, look upon my good deeds with pleasure and may a good word for me — Esarhaddon, king of Assyria (and) king of Babylon — be set upon his lips! May he determine as my fate a long life, fullness of old age, good health, and happiness!
Whoever you are, whether son of a palace servant, or a commoner, or a bearded (courtier), or a eunuch, or a citizen of Assyria or a foreigner, who comes forward and institutes a lawsuit or litigation against Aššur-etel-ilāni, king of Assyria, or against his sons, saying: "Pay (compensation) to me! I will forgive your (pl.) sins." You shall not listen to him nor comply with him, nor shall you pay (any) compensation to him. You shall not forgive his (
Your servant Ina-tešî-eṭir: I would gladly die for the king of the lands, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king of the lands, my lord!
to the eunuch ...
... there are ...
I said: "The king, my lord, is merciful. Let him ... "
Later, I will write to my lord about the work on the ziggurat. Right now, I am waiting for the king's caravan. When they come, I will direct them where to dump the straw and ...
He said: "... the merchant ... the governor of ...
... they are ...
to ...
10 ... textiles, of ... ;
... is the son of Nabû-dananni.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Ṣalmu-šarri-iqbi and his sons, shall return the money tenfold to its owners.
Witness Nabû-rehtu-uṣur, ...
For the goddess Inanna, lady of the lands, his lady: Esarhaddon, king of Assyria (and) king of Babylon, had baked bricks made anew for Esagil and Etemenanki.
... ,
Witness NN, scribe.
As to Aššur-bessunu about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
To the king, my lord: your servant, the chief tailor. Good health to the king, my lord. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord.
I am your god, I am your lord ...
Total 52: town of Til-kunaši.
... s, 3 women, ... , 1 son
I sent ...
To the governor, my brother: your sister, Urkittu-naṣir. Good health to my brother!
... I gave ...
... Now they are bringing in horses from Assyria
Witness NN, scribe.
In the future, in far-off days, may a future ruler, one of the kings, my descendants, renovate its dilapidated section(s). May he find an inscribed object bearing my name, anoint (it) with oil, make an offering, (and) return (it) to its place. The god Nabû and the goddess Tašmētu will (then) hear his prayers.
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
May Aššur, the king of heaven and earth, the lord of the lands, whose command cannot be changed, decree an evil fate for you.
Two sons of Inurta-ila'i, one each from ... , one each from ... ; one son of NN, a total of 4 men, servants of Šamaš-ahu-iddina —
... to the city ... I carried off ...
In the future may a later prince, when that wall becomes old and dilapidated, restore it. May he anoint with oil my monumental inscription, make sacrifices, (and) return (it) to its place. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
in accordance with the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord, and your favorable decisions, should the subject of this query, Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, strive and plan, and send Nabû-šarru-uṣur, rab mūgi, to Egypt, as he wishes, and should he go? Is it pleasing to your great divinity?
... s in the ... gate.
... the king, my lord
... I wrote
If a snake hangs down from the side of a door: a business will diminish.
... the king, my lord ...
to NN ...
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
Witness NN, son of Hannî.
... the land Missi, the land ... the land Patušarri, the land ... the land Bīt-Ḫamban, ... the land Sumurzu, the land ... the land ... , the land ... , the land Ni... , the land ... , the land ... , the land ... ,
1, the commander-in-chief of the left ... ;
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer ...
Witness Kenu-balaṭ, ditto.
I annexed to Assyria the cities Gatudu, Šaparda, Ša-pī-Bēl, Zarāti, Ḫamānu, Taraqu, Ḫayyūsi, (and) Tīl-Garimme, (cities) that had been the residence(s) of the god Ḫaldi (and) the goddess Bagbartu.
Aššur-ilaya,
cure of ...
1 ditto — Mullissu-zeru-ibni;
... of field in the town of Šarru-nuri
They have been brought to me ...
Witness Aššur-le'i, ...
For the goddess Inanna, mistress of the lands, great lady, his lady:
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, wise prince, circumspect ruler, shepherd of the people, (and) leader of a widespread population, I:
... "Let me go to the palace and speak to the magnates!" —
saying: "Why did you send ... to the Phrygian ... ?"
For the goddess Inanna, lady of Uruk, who dwells in Eanna, the august, supreme lady, his lady: Sargon (II), king of the world, viceroy of Babylon, king of Sumer (and) Akkad, (re)constructed (and) renovated Eanna, her beloved temple.
Your servant NN: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
Month Kislev (IX), 3rd day, eponym year of Sin-šarru-uṣur.
Witness ... -zeru-iddina, ... of the queen.
5 cans of beer;
The gods Ninurta and Nergal, who love my priesthood, gave to me the wild beasts and commanded me to hunt. I killed 350 strong lions from my ... chariot with my wildly vigorous assault with the spear. I killed 240 ostriches like caged birds with the spear. I killed 200 wild bulls with my wildly vigorous assault with the spear. I killed 100 ostriches like caged birds with the spear. I killed 100 strong lions from my ... chariot
Now then they are on their way to the Palace. Let my lord write me what  the king my lord's orders are.
At that time the wall of my city, Aššur, which I had previously built, (which) Adad-nārārī (I), my father, a king who preceded me, had previously restored — it had become dilapidated and old. Shalmaneser (I), king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I), king of Assyria, restored (it) — that wall had again become dilapidated and old. Aššur-rēša-iši, appointee of
... the city of Kannu', the city wall and its gates ... are completely built.
... of the eunuch
... and 20 hectares of land in the district of the town of Til-šikari —
Witness Remanni-Adad, ditto.
from Dur-Šarruken ...
3 ... of copper;
to Aššur-išmanni ...
Witness Nergal-šarru-uṣur, 'third man.'
... is on the shelf.
The palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, great king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dān (II) (who was) also king of the universe (and) king of Assyria.
I have given out the provisions for a whole month, by the seah of 8 'litres'.
in the town of Ehursaggalkurkurra in the mountain ... ,
Bel-na'id, a chariot owner, a servant of the king, my lord, (and) one of the ... s under my command, who was stationed in the service of Aššur-ila'i, the palace superintendent, was on a mission in the presence of Ina-tešî-eṭir when that man, having instigated a fight, struck him with a bow. Bel-na'id fled for (his) life and grasped the feet of Aššur-ila'i, (my) lord, (but) Ina-te
... which are in the district of the city ... are also in the possession of the people of ... They have brought them to Nineveh.
before the gods ...
Now then I am writing to the king, my lord; let the king, my lord, do whatever he finds acceptable.
3 ... ;
It is said in the relevant apotropaic ritual text (as follows):
1, prefect of the cavalry;
May they make evil and wicked things surround you like fire.
Yasubaya, a man of the 'Left' House, has ... ed the house of his lords.
The king, my lord, should have a look; if it pleases the king, my lord, let him appoint him. If not, the king, my lord, should find out why he is not acceptable and write me.
Witness Pan-Issar-lamur.
... the deaf ...
The room of the šuḫūru of the temple of the god Nabû which Ilu-šumma, a king of the past, had built, had become dilapidated and old. I removed its dilapidated section(s). I built (and) completed (it) from its foundation(s) to its crenellations. I made it larger than the one before. Inside I built Emelamana, the residence of the god Nabû, my lord. I deposited my monumental inscriptions and clay inscriptions.
Witness Nabû-eriba, deputy team-commander of the prince.
You shall not do (anything) that is evil and improper to Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, (nor) to his sons, his magnates, and the people of Assyria whom Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, has taken into his entourage, nor seek any other king or any other lord, nor swear an oath to any other king or any other lord.
Anu, Antu, Adad, Šala, Ea, Belet-ili, Damkina and Ninurta go to the Akitu House after Aššur. Šerua, Kippat-mati, Tašmetu, Haya and Kusu go before Aššur.
The temple of the goddess Ištar, mistress of Nineveh, my mistress, which Sennacherib, king of Assyria, son of Sargon (II), had previously built, had become dilapidated and I rebuilt it from top to bottom.
From this day, the ... th day of this month, the month ... of this year, to the ... th day of the month ... of this year, for 30 days and nights, my stipulated term —
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, ...
Witness Batulu, servant of ...
which Assurbanipal ...
Written according to the original and collated.
... of the sheep, of the oxen and of the cattle.
... s, gold ... ,
An estate of 100 (hectares of) land in the city of ...
The rest of the tribute I received from Nabû-šuma-iškun, the ... of the city Hamath.
... I restored the land Bīt-Arbela (and) reorganized (its administration). I settled there people from the land Kummuḫu that I had conquered and I had (them) occupy its (Bīt-Arbela’s) abandoned regions. I divided up that land into equal parts and assigned (them) to the authority of a eunuch of mine, the governor of the city Arbela, and a(nother) eunuch of mine, the governor of the city Buššu.
The 11th day: at court, favorable.
Nabâ,
If he does not give the woman, Nanî shall give a maid of his to the lady.
Month ... , xth day, eponym year of Mannu-ki-... , commander-in-chief of Que.
81 cedar roof-beams, 330 cypress roof-beams, 195 daprānu-juniper roof-beams, all fixed;
3 2-seah jars of hinhinu-seeds;
his sons ...
... as we do
Month of Shebat (XI), 1st day, eponym year of Ašaredu.
1 ... -garment, of linen, the edging red, of the country.
... the 'path' is present. The 'weapon'-mark of the 'well-being' rises towards the left.
... his ... and his city ...
Should Assurbanipal, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, send Nabû-šarru-uṣur, rab mūgi, to Egypt, as he wishes?
Witness Nanû.
I put to the sword the population of the city Ḫirimmu, a dangerous enemy, and I did not spare a single one. I hung their corpses on poles and placed (them) around the city. I reorganized that district (and) imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the gods of Assyria, my lords.
And after I had inquired (the will of) Šamaš and Adad, I lifted my hands and prayed:
... to
The 18th day.
The barley has not been piled up; they are still bringing it in.
... to the land Ḫatti ... the chieftains of the land Ḫatti ... the king, my lord, sent a bodyguard to them. They came before me (and) kissed my feet. I gave them cities in the land Ḫatti. (ii 10') The king, my lord, has since been treating them as my equals; they have become vassals of the king, my lord.
Pulu,
... ;
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
... adjoining the river (of the) town Na...
... vegetable garden ...
these ...
... its tower, which was destroyed
I have brought across the river 1,300 logs which were piled up on the river bank. Aššur-remanni the chief cook has checked them; they are quite sound.
Nabû-... , ... of the Neberu river, ...
May Palil, the lord of the desert, let the sandals of your feet be buried in the sand.
total 4 ... ;
... in my presence ...
adjoining the field of Ša-Aššur-dubbu,
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. The best of health to the king, my lord!
(As to) the news of the city of Kumme, I have written to the king, my lord, what I heard. If ...
(As for) the land Mār-Biti-... , a district in a remote place, a forgotten place of dry land, saline ground, a place of thirst, one hundred and forty leagues of desert, thistles, and gazelle-tooth stones, where snakes and scorpions fill the plain like ants — I left Mount Ḫazû, the mountain of saggilmud-stone, twenty leagues behind me and crossed over to that district to which no king before me had gone since earliest days. By the command of the god Aššur
Now ...
9 female Corybantes;
As to the garrison commanders about whom the king, my lord, wrote me: "They should each keep 100 horses at their disposal and the rest of their horses should come to me!" —
Iddin-Ea, ditto;
... will say ...
2 homers of roasted grain.
The governor of Arrapha has seized a city of mine, and all the people of the city have been killed. Even the prefect of Guzana has been killed ...
shall place x minas of refined silver and x minas of pure gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, shall tie two white horses at the feet of Aššur, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
35 homers of wine, the chief cook;
of 1,230 ...
1 mina, Nabû-... ;
40, the single-column tablet(s),
The king knows that all my men are chariot-horse trainers; none of them can handle a chariot. If a chariot-horse trainer leaves his post, he is fined one mina of silver.
To the vizier, my lord: your servant Nabû-zeru-iqiša. Good health to my lord!
Witness Ilumma-le'i.
5 sheep, 5 (cuts of) meat, 10 (whole) sheep — of the central city (harem).
... The 'path' is present...
... the Chaldeans ...
The charge of the rear palace is doing very well; he has completely recovered. The king, my lord, can be happy. May the gods of the king, my lord, have mercy on him.
To the king, my lord: your servant Mahdê. Good health to the king, my lord!
Arzezu,
or in ... ,
Witness Zababa-eriba, 'third man.'
in front of ...
... I sent ... to the king, my lord. The king, my lord ...
Aššur ...
... its front ...
NN, farmer, ... ; 1 son, ... ; 2 women; 2, ... :
... care of Mar-suri
... the defeat of ...
... in their presence
... the governor(s)
... their ... s ...
We have no bread to eat and no water to drink.
... the god Ea
... the land of Raši
... of Nabû-šuma-iškun ...
NN ... has contracted and bought (said property) from Aššur-... , from Hanî, from ... am, from these gentlemen, the owners of the property being sold.
When the king, my lord, ... , the town of Til-šikari was affected along with the whole district.
... this
... to Babylon, as he says
1 ditto of fish;
As to what I said to the king, my lord, namely: "... "
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, then I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, fortified cities, together with the small(er) settlements in their environs (and) the district of the land Bīt-Barrû in its entirety, and I added (this area)
Ammon
If a planet rises in the time of the king: the king of the world will exercise world rule.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
... 4 ... s,
... a long time
... the land of Paruṭtu
x talents, the mares of the palace;
a cup of olives,
... to the slave-girls of ...
... Iau-bi'dî
10 shekels of silver belonging to Ahu'a-amur, at the disposal of Nadinu.
NN, son of Zazî, owner of the man being sold.
Month “Opening of the Door,” eponymy of Atar-ili, governor of the land Laḫīru (673 BC).
10 minas of silver ... ;
... I gave ... as a gift ... for the well-being of my offspring.
... he has seized ... , saying: "The king has ... ed my ... ;  ... me! ... "
... the king, my lord, ...
Witness Haldi-ahu-uṣur, horse trainer of the royal bodyguard.
Your servant Sada-sa'am: I would gladly die for the grand vizier, my lord! Say to my lord:
The covering of the roof that (hangs) over the corridors — I made their somber atmosphere cheerful, making (them) as bright as day. (vi 1) I decorated them with silver and copper knobbed nails. I adorned the arches, friezes, and all of the copings with baked bricks (glazed in the color of) obsidian (and) lapis lazuli.
... Yakin-ahhe-mani ...
which on ... ,
... there were clouds in the sky; Venus set in the east behind the clouds. The king should not be afraid of the clouds ...
for a favor ...
... he is a good man
I created around it a botanical garden, a replica of Mount Amanus, which has all kinds of aromatic plants (and) fruit trees, trees that are the mainstay of the mountains and Chaldea, collected inside it.
He should have checked; he ...
From Nabû-iqbi.
... me, who am I? I am a dog
... of Hatti, ...
NN, his wife, his son;
Witness Aššur-le'i, 'third man.'
Issar-... ,
Total, 10,000 stalks of vine, 1 house, 1 threshing-floor, 1 vegetable garden, in the town of Dadi-abu'a, attached to the farm of Aššur-matka-pahhir.
Ilu-eriba;
... Se'-abu...
The woman Aya-hâ, wife of Nabû-zeru-lešir, gardener, mother of Nabû-zeru-lešir —
That which is (written) on a throne at the footstool of the god Marduk.
a writing-board ...
... the second (size)... , with a base, ditto;
... the king, my lord
... , Bel-tarṣi-iluma,
... of the prefect ... of the Ionians.
Banî, ... ;
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
The king should act as he deems best.
Sasî, ditto of ... ;
Kaštaritu, city lord of Karkaššî, who has now sent his messengers to Nabû-šuma-iškun the ... , saying: "Let us stand together, mobilize an army and go to wage war against the Elamite" —
... house ...
At the beginning of my kingship, in my first year, when the gods Aššur, Anu, Sîn, Šamaš, Adad, and Ištar, the great gods, my lords, selected me among my brethren and desired (me) as king, (ii 10') in the month Ayyāru (II), the month of the god Ea — the lord of humankind, the one who fashioned the physique of my royal majesty — I was appointed by the god Marduk, the king of the gods, to the kingship
On the ... th day Nergal-belu-uṣur came with x oxen and x hectares of field ... , saying: "Let me take the oxen and hectares of field of Puṭu-eši and give them to the ... "
... seah of  8 'litres'
In the great cult centers, I prayed to the great gods. I went to Uruk, Larsa, and Ur and had silver, gold, (and) selected stone(s) brought in before the god Bēl (Marduk), the goddess Bēltīya (Zarpanītu), the god Nabû, the goddess Tašmētu, the god Nergal, the goddess Laṣ, the god Dagan, the god Ninurta, the god Nusku, the goddess Šarrat-Kidmuri, the goddess N
Disregard that ...
The one who crushed the Barnaki, a dangerous enemy, who live in the city Tīl-Ašurri, which is called Pitānu in the language of the people of the city Miḫrānu;
I and ...
In order to open that canal, I sent an exorcist (and) a lamentation singer and, in addition, ten pure sacrifices to the gods who dwell in the city Ḫarrān and the goddess Ištar, the mistress of the city Ḫarrān. (The gods) granted me a reign without equal and they made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises.
(whether) he will become hostile (and) start a fight against them,
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer ...
... the king, my lord, wrote
I have seized the city of Sais ...
... he has seized ... in my presence ... I have written down on a writing-board the ... s of the people of ... and I am herewith sending it to the king, my lord. The king, my lord should ... the ... of the people of ...
... the treaty
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why have you not arrested him and put him in irons?" He is in his town, in his house, with his family. His brother Ašipâ is here, keeping the watch of the king, my lord. His brother Nabû-eṭir, who was sent to Calah to greet the king, my lord, is here as well, keeping the watch of the king, my lord.
... are keeping watch over here.
In the base of the middle surface of the 'finger' there is a 'weapon'-mark which faces the middle of the 'finger.'
x minas of silver by the mina of the king belonging to Dari-Bel,
May any future ruler, one of the kings, my descendants, whom the god Aššur names for shepherding the land and people, renovate its dilapidated section(s) when that palace becomes old and dilapidated. May he find an inscribed object bearing my name, anoint (it) with oil, make an offering, (and) return (it) to its place. The god Aššur and the goddess Ištar will (then) hear his prayers.
Witness Nabû-šumu-iškun, chariot driver.
... I sent him ...
The hub of the wheel of the chariot is (made) of musukkannu-wood. The wheel of the chariot is turned towards the front of the chariot. The 'well-being' is present. The 'path' on the left of the gall bladder is present. There are 4 'foot'-marks in the left of the gall bladder...
Total 589 horses, 7 mules.
The palace of Amēl-Marduk, great king, king of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, son of Nebuchadnezzar (II), great king, king of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad.
Assurbanipal, the crown prince of the Succession Palace, who for many days, month after month, has day and night been moaning before your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and (whom) your great divinity knows —
If a cloudbank lies at the left of the sun: the king will conquer a land not his own.
I sent my messenger to Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II) regarding these matters. He detained the eunuch of mine whom I had sent (Marduk-šarru-uṣur) and did not give a reply to my word(s). (10) Ummanigaš sent his messenger to Assyria (with the message): “I have detained the messenger of Assyria. A messenger of the house of Aššur-zeru-ibni is with me.”
I have given you ... ; ...
14 ... ;
Nabû-šar-ahhešu;
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, scribe.
... I sent a eunuch of mine, the chief eunuch, to the land of the Manneans... I placed on him the yoke of my lordship... they were constantly beseeching my lordship ... (and) they were praying to my gods...
Now, if it is agreeable to the king, my lord, I shall write to the Sealanders.
I took the deities Sîn, Ningal, Nusku, and Sardanunna, by the hand, (leading them out) of Šuanna (Babylon), the city of my royal majesty, and I made (them) reside inside the residence of (their) happiness during joyous celebrations.
8 'litres' ... ;
The Urarṭian captain has come out of Waisi and gone to the Palace. According to what he has said, the captain of the ... is going to meet him."
The new regular offerings.
Moreover, I struck with the sword Teušpa, a Cimmerian, together with his entire army, in the (territory of) the land Ḫubušna, which is on the shore of the sea. Moreover, I struck with the sword Iaū-biʾdī (Ilu-biʾdī), a man of Bīt-Ḫanban, together with his entire army, in the (territory of) the land Gambulu, which is on the shore of the sea.
The palace of Aššur-...
I mustered my troops (and) reached the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians, who since time immemorial had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors. In the high mountains, difficult terrain, I rode on horseback and had my personal chariot carried on (men’s) necks. In very rugged terrain I roamed about on foot like a wild bull. (i 45) I surrounded (and) conquered the cities Bīt-Kilamzaḫ, Ḫardišpu, (and) Bīt
Concerning the news of the ... s, Nabû-rehtu-uṣur son of  Kabtiya has written to me as follows: "The Deaf (and) Dumb have been brought out  from Babylon."
To the king, my lord: your servant Adad-šumu-uṣur. Good health to  the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
The king, my lord, should send (word) to the magnates that they may proceed against Medes. If they proceed, the king, my lord, should send (word) that they may proceed only up to a certain point. Elam has ... ed a treaty with them, and they are not loyal to the king, my lord. They will not obey the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should not trust their word. They have changed ... , and their mouths are full of lies. The king, my lord, should not let himself be deceived by their ... and should not trust
Silim-ašum,
... the ... who are in the presence of the king
Witness Mannu-ki-Ninua, ...
... now
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether these men or their sons or their grandsons or their brothers or any relative of theirs, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Kakkullanu and his sons,
Witness Nabû-šallimšunu.
a writing-board ...
(As for) him, Umman-menanu (Ḫumban-menanu), the king of the land Elam, along with the king of Babylon (and) the sheikhs of Chaldea who marched at his side, terror of doing battle with me overwhelmed them like alû-demons. They abandoned their tents and, in order to save their lives, they trampled the corpses of their troops as they pushed on.
from the town of ... thite ...
On account of this, when the god Aššur, my lord, faithfully chose me to worship him, gave me the scepter for my office of shepherd, (presented) me in addition the staff for my office of herdsman ... ; when the god Nabû, ... , gave me wide understanding equal to that of the sage Adapa (and) endowed me with broad knowledge; (when) the god Ea, ... , granted me vast insight equal to that of the sage Adapa (and) endowed me with broad understanding;
On the 17th day the king goes down to the House of God.
... -ereš has contracted and bought for 10 shekels of silver.
To the king of the lands, my lord: your servant Bel-iddina. May Bel, Nabû and Šamaš bless the king, my lord!
... Marduk-šumu-uṣur from ...
... I ...
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
He (the king of Elam) has sent a messenger to the city of ... , saying: 'Tell the magnates of Bit-Yakin to ... '
Scribe: NN.
... will go
The king my lord knows that I have been living in his house as a tenant, and he has been supporting me. Now, this year, my brother has come and driven me out of the house of my lord. I have no house and no maid. I am dying of hunger and thirst. May the king my lord not abandon me, may he not forsake me!
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Total 71,000 (homers) wheat in the town of Til-abnâ.
Disregard that the day is overcast and it has rained...
the men ...
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
... Ištar ...
Nabû-šarru-uṣur has written to ...
Seal of Nabû-ahhe-šallim, son of Nabû-zeru-iddina, owner of the vineyard being sold.
If Venus disappears in the east in Nisan (I) from the 1st to the 30th day: the enemy will take the land ...
If in Tebet (X) the moon becomes visible on the 29th day: the Ahlamû will devour Subartu; a foreigner will rule the Westland.
... I wrote him
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
(All) that I have heard, I have  written to the king, my lord.
Anu and Antu, the Great Gods, the Narudi, Nusku, Šala, Ea-šarru, Damkina, Usumû, Kittu, Mišaru, Šakkan:
Ninuayu,
200 (homers) of barley.
Witness ...
former ...
... s the lord ...
... gardener; 1 woman; 1 daughter, weaned: a total of 4 people.
If on the 14th day the moon and sun are seen together: the speech of the land will become reliable; the land will become happy; the king will become happy; the cattle of Akkad will lie in the steppe undisturbed.
If Jupiter becomes visible in the path of the Anu stars: the king of Akkad will become strong and overthrow his enemies in all lands in battle.
An estate of 1 decare of field in the middle of ...
... his people
May Sin, the brightness of heaven and earth, clothe you with leprosy and forbid your entering into the presence of the god or king.
10 hectares, the town of ... ;
Sa'ilu, his servant —
... of field in the village of Nabû
— Jupiter stands in the halo of the moon.
From Bulluṭu.
Kanunayu, servant of Aššur-ila'i —
... saw ...
with ...
In the future, in far-off days, may one of the kings, my descendants, whom the god Aššur and the goddess Ištar name to rule the land and people, renovate the dilapidated section(s) of that palace when it becomes old and dilapidated.
... , NN and his friends ...
1 hand-ring, 1/2 mina in weight;
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, have changed or altered the proceedings, or jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, king of kings, lord of lords, ruler of rulers, prince, lord of all, conqueror of the rebellious — those who do not submit to him (and) who are hostile to the god Aššur—, defeater of the princes of the Qutu as far as the land Meḫru, disperser of the forces of the land of the Šubaru and the remote lands Nairi as far as the border of Makan, strong king, capable
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also great king, strong king, king of the world, (and) king of Assyria; valiant man who acts with the support of Aššur, his lord, and has no rival among the princes of the four quarters, marvelous she
... whose kings, my ancestors, used to regularly receive the tribute of the kings of the Upper and Lower Sea(s), the habitations of the distant mountain regions, (and) the lands beyond the River(s), as far as the border of Makan, ... I myself now receive in my city Aššur.
Village of Bani-ila'i — Ilu-iṣṣuranni
... Ṣil-... , his scribe.
The commander-of-fifty and the chariot driver whom I sent  have come up to me.
The first day we celebrated ... ;
Month Tammuz (IV), 22nd day, eponym year of Ilu-isse'a.
Month ... , 8th day, eponym year of Aššur-bani (713 B.C.).
in all, 78 ... men.
The Ukkean has written to me: "The Urarṭian has  gone to greet his son, who is in the service of the chief cupbearer. The  Urarṭian has also said to me: 'Why do you seize deserters from my  country (and) take them to Waisi? If I were the king of Urarṭu, I  would seize deserters from your country and take them to  Waisi.'"
her sons, her daughters, and her whole household
I have heard that the 'third men' of the Urarṭian have come down to my side of the river, crossed over to me with 100 horses, and are staying with me in Nineveh."
The base of the middle 'finger' of the lung is 'bound.' The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
... I said: "Lay down ... !"
Haruranu, his wife and 3 daughters;
I shall do ...
... his ... to his presence
The king, my lord, should ... the ... who brought the captives.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, have jumbled the oracle query in my mouth, or changed (or) altered the proceedings...
... said, saying: "...
... the rear
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ahhe-eriba. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Ahi-qamu, ... ;
... :
The money is paid completely. That ... is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The men of the deputy of the village manager ... who took away the ... s of the king's men, and who are bringing the stone thresholds to Nineveh.
Witness Tabalayu. Witness Urdu-Nanaya.
... the 7th day, the 8th day, ...
O Aššur, father of the gods, ... , creator of everything, ... , the one who molds the Igīgū and Anunnakū gods, the one who fashions the physique of my royal majesty, ... , look upon my good deeds with pleasure and speak well of me — Esarhaddon, ... , the one who is assiduous towards your places (of worship) ... , the one who reveres your great divinity ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Abi-yaqiya. Good health to the king, my lord!
... the commandant
Basnî ...
and the servitude of Ku...
Witness ...
... the dead ones whom the king, my lord
Witness Ibašši-ilani.
... of sheep
of the king, my lord, ...
I have sent Umman-minâ and the bodyguard with the captives.
I placed Bēl-ibni, a eunuch of mine, on his royal throne (and) entrusted him with the people of the land Akkad. I appointed my eunuchs to be governors over all of the districts of Chaldea and I imposed the yoke of my lordship upon them. (iv 35) For my part, I constantly received their gifts (and) regularly heard their prayers. In Babylon, Borsippa, (and) Cutha, I offered pure sacrifices to the gods Bēl, Zarpanītu, N
The king should posthaste send a bodyguard to bring me the tablet. I shall read it in the king my lord's presence, and shall also send a copy of it to the palace.
Eunuchs of mine heard these words and outwitted their cunning plans. They seized their mounted messenger(s) along with their messages and they saw their deceitful acts. They seized Šarru-lū-dāri (and) Necho and put (their) hands and feet in fetters (and) handcuffs.
... three ...
a house in its entirety in the city of Ṭabete,
Concerning Šarru-emuranni about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let him come and receive the horses from the commandant!" — now then I am sending him over with my messenger.
20 hectares of arable land, 10 hectares under cultivation therein.
... mules of Calah
To the king, my lord: your servant DN-ṣurri. Good health to the king, my lord!
The king has captured ... of the Chaldeans
... their ... , ... their ...
... who go up to the roof of the house of Adad
May Ea, king of the Abyss, lord of the springs, ... you deadly water, and fill you with dropsy.
... to their places ...
Concerning the king my lord's servant, Pulu, about whom I wrote to the king, saying: "20 men from Dur-Ladinii have come and taken him to the presence of the king, your father; if the king, my lord, commands, I shall send (word) and have them return him to his post here" —
(whether) they will kill what there is to kill, plunder what there is to plunder, loot what there is to loot,
of the palace of the king ...
Adad-nerari (III),
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
From Rašil the older, servant of the king.
All this is of the nature of the observation of Venus.
Total 100 — (province of) Kannu'.
until ...
... the ... of the king
they should bring ...
x shekels of silver on account of ...
... to the king, my lord.
From Balasî.
... to the king
... to my feet
1 writing-board ...
I sent a herald ...
When the temple of Amurru collapsed and Amurru was moved into the Aššur temple, all the Amorite artifacts that I had donated to the temple of Amurru ...
... did not come ... ; the oxen and sheep of the king, my lord, are well.
the men of Na...
... the king should go out and ... the chariot ...
... he has sent ... to ...
The lower part is elevated ...
The hand of Nabû-naṣir, priest of Aššur.
When the chief eunuch of the king of Elam came to ... , I said to him: "You and the troops of the Elamite ... do not enter the city."
... against us
I wrote to Šamaš-šumu-ukin on the 11th of Tammuz (IV): "Send the servants of the chief cupbearer!" He did not agree but said: "I will send them to you in the month of Ab (V)."
(But) as for me, Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, the performing of this work came to my attention by the will of the gods and I put my mind to it. I forcibly removed the people of Chaldea, Aramean (tribes), the land of the Manneans, the lands Que and Ḫilakku, (and) Philistia, and the land (of the city) Tyre, who had not submitted to my yoke, then I made them carry baskets (of earth) and they
Witness Aššur-reṣuwa, chief porter of the palace.
... me. They are with them.
... As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me, I am working on it.
... you ...
of ...
Witness Šamaš-šarru-ibni.
To the god Aššur, his lord: Sargon (II), presented (this object).
and Nabû-šezib before ...
If Nabû-šezibanni says (so), the king should not  let go of the ropes of the chariot until he has tested it.
The second messenger whom I sent ...
May the goddess Ištar, mistress of the lands, look upon this work with pleasure and may she bestow a (long) life on me. May she make my weapons prevail over all (my) enemies.
... the village of ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
The king, my lord, should send a bodyguard ... to the Palace Superintendent; he should speak kindly with him, and ...
A tablet of ... to NN, his brother: Good health to my brother! The king, my lord, is well. The city of Arrapha is well. The queen is well.
He said: "Nabû-aplu-iddina is in Babylon.
NN, farmer, and his people; ... hi, farmer, and his people.
Witness Zarutî, cohort commander.
Marduk-apla-iddina ...
... the eunuchs of the crown prince;
Witness Abba-ra'û, ...
I had a palace of elephant ivory, ebony, boxwood, musukkannu-wood, cedar, cypress, juniper, and terebinth, (a palace that I named) Egalzagdinutukua (“The Palace Without a Rival”), constructed thereon as my royal residence.
The old-fashioned razor which they use for cutting off the hair of the sacred parts is made of agate. The new one which they have invented is of obsidian.
Month Tishri (VII), ... th day, eponym year of Nabû-ahu-uṣur.
Bel-ereš and Abi-rahî.
As to what you wrote: "May I hear my lord's answer to (my) letter!" — I have now read your letter. As for the gods, let them ... in accordance with what you wrote.
Witness Aplî.
The priest of Aššur circumambulated the House. The baker, the brewer, the ... (and) the ... went (away).
Witness Paršidu, village manager.
I have written to my brother, what is it that he commands?
Concerning the town about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why have you taken the ... without my (permission)?" — Duri-Adad, the ... of the town has said to me: "The king has given (it) to me. When ... came, he gave (it) to me ... "
... the Aramean(s)
all Gurreans ...
... and give to the king, our lord.
10 ... ;
... of the land of Musku ...
... ditto, white;
Ditto by Ištar of Nineveh and Ištar of Arbela!
In the future, may one of the sons, grandsons, or great grandsons, one of the kings, my descendants, whom the god Aššur and the goddess Ištar name to rule the land and people, renovate the dilapidated section(s) of that palace when it becomes old and dilapidated. May he find an inscribed object bearing my name, anoint (it) with oil, make an offering, (and) return (it) to its place.
Witness Nabû-ahu-uṣur, royal bodyguard.
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
I have sent my messengers to the magnates; as soon as they come back to me, I shall write to the king, my lord, whatever news there is.
If the sun rises and its light ... does not ...
Witness Nuhšaya, porter.
Izzia, eunuch of the king, has contracted and bought (said property) from Remutu-ili.
... the Mannean people ...
A ... of ... has been brought to ... ; the ... and the mayor of ...
2 ... ;
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
As to what you wrote: "Should I send his subjects to him just as he sent me the subjects of the king my lord?" — send them to him so that he will be favourably disposed towards us. Whether 100 men or 10, write to him like this: "I wrote to the king my lord about the men of Que whom you sent to me, and he was  extremely pleased; and in return he wrote to me as follows: 'Do  not hold back even a single one of the Phrygian troops, but send them to Midas immediately!' Thus at the king my
(As for) Nabû-naʾid (and) Bēl-ēṭir, sons of Nabû-šuma-ēreš, the šandabakku (governor of Nippur), whose father, the one who had engendered them, had stirred up Urtaku to fight with the land Akkad — the bones of Nabû-šuma-ēreš, which they had taken out of the land Gambulu to Assyria, I made them (lit. “his sons”) crush those bones opposite the Citadel Gate of Nine
Bel-iqišanni,
Witness NN. Witness Barruqu.
I said: "You should speak with your brother ...
Witness Ququ.
all to ...
... to the merchant ...
In Shebat (XI), the 1st day: favorable.
All this from an Assyrian woman.
who is in charge of ...
The people with whom I am bringing the boats.
The king mounts the rikshaw ...
A tablet of the palace scribe to the chief ... of the palace.
I have sent (word); where are they keeping him? The chief ...
Nabû-gamil,
Written according to the original and collated.
Total 23 horses,
Month Ab (V), 18th day, eponym year of ...
The king, my lord, knows that the woman who is in the service of  Inurta-ila'i is the sister of Nergal-naṣir. When he went away, he took  her with him. She is now here ...
... the men of the Itu'eans ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-šumu-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Ištar bless the king, my lord!
The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number.
You shall not do (anything) that is evil and improper to Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, (nor) to his sons, (his) magnates, or the people of Assyria whom Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, has taken into his entourage and adopted as his own offspring, but, should they become hostile to you, you shall not desert him and, should you become hostile to him, you shall not do (anything) that is evil and improper to him.
I am the Lady of Arbela. I am the Lady of Leman.
1 ditto of grapes; a ditto of olives;
A tablet of Ummanigaš to the king, his brother: I would gladly die for the king, my brother! May Aššur and Ešarra bless the king, my brother! Say to the king, my brother: I have sent a messenger to greet the king, the horses and the soldiers.
NN, ... ;
... in this way
As to the Suhaean about whom the king, my lord, wrote me: "Why do you lie? Send (word) that the should be questioned!" —
the corn rations ...
Let the king, my lord, write me how much barley there is left.
Nabû-šumu-iddina, scribe.
The name of the other one is Liphur-ilu, he is the son of Nergal-apil-kumu'a.
... he will reach the five ...
... Bit-Amukani ...
I sent ...
... I have been sent ...
... who
As to the 6 oxen of the merchant about which the king, my lord, wrote me,
I had a stele made and had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, written on it.
I am writing to you right now: As long as I am in the entourage of the king, my lord, everything that I write to you in this letter will be heard by the king, my lord. If I send this letter to the king, my lord, it is because I have heard something terrible about the country of Gambulu. I am writing to you right now: do not conceal anything that I have told you, but rather speak up and inform the king, my lord!
Witness Nabû-šumu-iddina, mayor.
The money is paid completely. That field, house, threshing floor, garden and spring are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Witness ... , ... of the Inner City.
... Ištar who dwells in ...
If the Fish star comes close to the top of the moon and stands there: the fish of the (lower) sea will come up and eat the fish of the upper sea; a huge flood will come.
... garden ...
their ears ...
... Aššur-šarru-uṣur,
To the king, my lord: your servant Mannu-ki-Adad. Good health to the king, my lord!
... is not good ...
As to what Bel-naṣir wrote to the king, my lord: "... the  loin of a sheep ...
Witness NN, 'third man.'
The men, who as soon as they heard of the king's approach, abandoned their work and fled into the temples, are now coming out from the temples and (again) doing the work. They say: "If there is no work for us in the temple, we shall go to Babylon." What should I do?
(Ditto, ditto;) just as a worm eats ... , so may the worm eat, while you are (still) alive, your own flesh and the flesh of your wives, your sons and your daughters.
to the king, my lord, ...
... , x persons; NN, ...
Month ... , xth day, eponym year of Sagab (651).
a substitute ...
Seal of Še... ,
Nabû-balassu-iqbi
... a cup of oil;
When Nabû-na'id seized me by surprise, I did not know what to do; I did not open my mouth, I did not cry out, I did not appeal to the king.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... the Deas
the architect ...
1, NN, ... ;
... Belet-balaṭi ...
The man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity ... he has come to my city, and I have encouraged him.
For the god Enlil, king of heaven and earth, sovereign of the gods, prince (who decides) the fates, his lord: Ashurbanipal, his obedient shepherd, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, (re)built Ekur, his beloved temple, with baked bricks.
... the land of Gambulu ... I settled them there.
Disregard that ... an evil heart ...
... the temple stewardess of ...
Your servant NN: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! May Uraš and Ninegal bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
If the moon becomes visible in Sivan (III) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
Witness Nabû-naṣir, horse trainer of the palace.
The baker and the brewer have the usufruct of the intestines and  the bugurru of the bull of the 2nd day.
Samsī-iškun ... , son of Ḫammu-rāpi, son of Iautaʾ, son of Hazael, ... (5) ... the land Qedar, which is in the midst of the sea ...
He said: "Ullusunu has requested from me 1,000 horses. I have given him 1,000 horses. (Now) PN, the envoy of Hubuškia, has come to me saying: 'The Ukkean has killed the ... of the king of Elam. The ... of the king of Elam has fled to me and is with me. I have sent him to the king of Assyria ... '"
If the moon and sun are in opposition: the king of the land will widen his understanding.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
... the ... -official of the chamberlain, the palace  superintendent, the ... official of the palace ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
I am writing to you right now: you have ... ed too much, you have not done ...
The forts of the king, my lord, are well.
... the fort ...
Remuttu, ... , and ...
Witness Šumma-ilani.
1 prayer bowl ditto;
Moreover, (as for) Ṣidqâ, the king of the city Ashkelon who had not bowed down to my yoke, I forcibly removed the gods of his father’s house, himself, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his brothers, (and other) offspring of his father’s house and took him to Assyria.
... I have given orders ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
The temple of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, which Ilu-šumma, a king of the past (lit. “former times”), son of Šalim-aḫum, had built, had become dilapidated and old. I cleared away its debris, reconstructed the weakened (portions), (and) completely rebuilt the temple from top to bottom. I deposited my monumental inscription.
I have sent word, and (as soon as) he comes, I and Zabinu will speak with him; when we come to an agreement, I shall write to the king, my lord.
5 talents, Review Palace of Calah;
I appointed over them Bēl-ibni, a son of a rab banî (and) a scion of Šuanna (Babylon) who had grown up like a young puppy in my palace, as king of the land of Sumer and Akkad.
I am Nabû-gamil, your servant and one who reveres you.
Month Iyyar (II), 10th day, eponym year of Dadî, governor of Kurbail.
(As for) the Cimmerians, a dangerous enemy who had never feared my ancestors, and, with regard to me, had not grasped the feet of my royal majesty, (ii 10') with the support of the gods Aššur, Bēl (Marduk), and Nabû, the great gods, my lords, he (Gyges) clamped (them) in manacles, handcuffs, (and) neck-stocks and sent (them) before me, together with his substantial audience gift(s).
On my third campaign, I marched against Baʾalu, the king of the land Tyre who resides in the middle of the sea. Because he did not honor my royal command(s and) did not obey the pronouncement(s) from my lip(s), I set up outposts against him. To prevent his people from leaving, I reinforced (its) garrison. By sea and dry land, I took control of (all of) his routes (and thus) cut off (all) access to him. (ii 15') I made water and food for the preservation of
... will make it go out
Month of the god Sin, eponymy of Šamaš-napišti-Adad.
Witness Bel-abu'a.
NN, ... of the queen, has contracted and bought it for x minas of silver ...
7 big loaves;
I have seized the cities of theirs which were easy to conquer and plundered  them. Now, let them send their troops to me who are inside (the territory of)  the city Sumandir.
The king of Elam heard about the conquest of his cities and fear fell upon him. He brought the rest of the people of his land into fortresses. He abandoned the city Madaktu, his royal city, and set out for the city Ḫaydala, which is in the mountains.
At that time the site of the great cult center, the city Aššur, had become weak (and) its foundation had become shaky. The great cult center, the city Aššur, which earlier kings, my ancestors, had had constructed for the proper administration of the black-headed (people), the inspection of thoroughbred horses, mules, agālu-donkeys, military equipment, chariots, carts, wagons, quivers, bows, and uṣṣu-arrows, every type of (ii 5) implement of war, (and) the
... the Babylonians ...
The singer intones, “My lord, may your angered heart relent to me.” The singer keeps reciting: “May your angered heart relent to me.”
Salamu,
They are very glad ...
Witness NN, royal bodyguard.
to the lady Nanaya ...
... Nergal-... , ... of the king, ... ;
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur, eunuch.
The king, my lord, should send (word) that they bring me ... ; otherwise I  shall ... the ... of the king, my lord, ... the ... of ...
Its radiance is diminished. The 'path' is present. The 'strength' is present. The 'well-being' is present...
Adad-apla-iddina, son of the goddess Ninisina, king of Babylon, prince who reveres him, the one to whom the god Nanna has stretched out his hand, the one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of the great gods, am I —
The king should send (word) that they should bring me ... , and  I will (then) send my people to the king.
The bow in his hand and the arrow in his quiver are the emblem of Aššur, the bow in his hand is the emblem of Ninurta, the arrow in his quiver is the emblem of Nergal.
... his/my ... seized him and ... ed him, and ... of his chariots, wagons, horses, mules, ... I left ... and returned to Nineveh, my capital city.
Witness ... a, ...
In the future may a later prince, when that palace becomes old and dilapidated, restore it. May he anoint with oil my monumental inscription, make sacrifices, (and) return (it) to its place. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
Ana-Nabû-taklak, the son of Šamaš-šumu-ukin,
Concerning the crown prince about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let him come and settle (the matter) with them" — he has come, and I have settled it with them. The crown prince may now come and settle (the matter) with them.
Šulmanu-... , ... ;
The merchant who brought the (caravan) of merchants through the  desert, saying: "I will take the caravan of merchants through the desert" —  that merchant did not take the caravan of merchants through the desert.  Instead, he left them on the outskirts of the city.
(As for) the one who alters my inscribed object (and) disrespects my words, may the god Aššur, my lord, overthrow his sovereignty. May he destroy his name (and) his seed from the land. May the goddess Ištar, my mistress, bring about the defeat of his land. May he not stand firm before his enemy. May the god Adad strike his land with terrible lightning (and) afflict his land with want.
Seal of Nabû-riba-ahhe, scribe.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
May the goddess Ištar, mistress of battle, ...
... in the charge of Nabû-le'i, the sartinnu.
2, 000 ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "The gods of the king have provided peace to the king, my lord!" —
a ditto of olives;
The chariot which goes to the Akitu House and comes back has no driver. Without a driver it rocks about.
Mannu-ki-... ;
you defeated them ...
... said to me: "... you
... his face
Good health to my lord!
To the king, my lord: your servant, Ahhešaya. Good health to the king, my lord!
... you, come!
Ullusunu, the Mannean,
... the son of Anu
By the gods of the king, I have not changed the location of the camp nor moved the troops who are with me! Aššur, Šamaš, and Marduk have provided peace for the king my lord, and I am acting in accordance with this.
You are the true seed of Aššur. Through your firm ‘yes’ I marched about safely from the Upper Sea to the Lower Sea, and I had no opponent (therein). You are the one who makes my weapons prevail over all enemies. You are the one who cuts down my foes. You are the one who makes my reign secure. You are the one who makes my dynasty great. And because you are the one who puts my enemies under my feet, by the command of the goddess Ištar, the great lady, my mistress, may the kingship be forever established for me
Mannu-ki-Arbail, ... , and his scribe, along with ... and the son of the scribe ... , have been arrested.
Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, viceroy of Ur, built anew the Gipāru, the house of the supreme goddess, beloved wife of the god Sîn.
I tore down that small palace in its entirety, then I changed the course of the Tebilti River, repaired (the effects of) the erosion, and directed its outflow.
... the king, my lord
Witness Kinaya.
Witness Bardî, palace farmer of the queen.
A tablet of ... -ereš to the king, his lord. Good health to the king, my lord!
The 'weapon'-mark of the 'increment' rises to the left.
Month Nisan (I), eponym year of Iddin-Papsukkal.
... they have promoted ...
Now, the king, my lord, should send a royal bodyguard to find out the details (of the case). If it turns out that way, the king, my lord, should impose a heavy punishment upon him. I have written to the king, my lord, only as a reminder; the king, my lord, may do as he deems best.
Witness NN.
20, in the charge of Zeru-ibni, the cook.
Witness ... -Nabû.
Concerning the ... about which the king, our lord, wrote to us, is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
The news of the son of Yakin: he has left Babylon and gone to Damascus. He has not been seen in our land.
... of the goddess Ištar of Arbela
1 seah 1 'litre' of spiced bread; a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
... to the men
... , Enuma Anu Enlil,
May the god Nanna, king of the Enlil (circle of) gods, the progenitor of all (other) gods, the one who decrees fates, the one who formulates designs, the one who inspects the works of the Igīgū and Anunnakū gods, (and) the one who makes the foundation of the throne of (the god) Aššur, king of the gods, firm, look with fury on Ashurbanipal, king of Assyria, (my) unfaithful brother, and may he remove his name (and
... years
... the palace overseer
Disregard what they speak with (their) mouths, or what they think...
... to Nabû'a.
Now, if it is agreeable to the king, my lord, let them settle my accounts.
The commander-of-fifty and the ‘third man’ of the son of Yakin had an audience with me, saying: “May the king give us the people of the Merchant Town so we can cultivate seed.” I told them: “The king has given the Merchant Town to Sippar. Nobody is going to give it to you.”
An estate of 1 hectare ... adjoining ...
... appointed ...
... after the king had asked ...
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
Bel and Nabû ...
If a planet ... to the constellation ... : the king of the land ... will fall.
an estate of 2 decares adjoining Ba'al-ili and Ilu-ereš;
May Nabû (and) Marduk bless the king, my lord! May Aššur,  Šamaš, Bel and Nabû give happiness and physical well-being to the king, my lord!
Witness Mannu-ki-Adad, royal bodyguard.
Now, if it is acceptable to the king, my lord, let the king, my lord, issue an order to Zeru-ibni that he should release us so we can perform the king's work.
Bel-kenu-uṣur,
(As for) the city Uppume, the royal city of the land Bīt-Imbî, which is located on the border of the land Elam, (iii 5'') the people living there trusted in their rugged mountains and did not respect the dominion of Assyria. (As for) Tandāya (and) their city rulers, who had never bowed down to the yoke of the kings, my ancestors, they were constantly plundering the land Yamutbal (and) had laid waste to its pasture land. With regard to these deeds, the
If the moon becomes visible on the 30th day: frost.
... Urdu and the men with him ...
... will they instigate an insurrection and rebellion against Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, and Assurbanipal, the crown prince of the Succession Palace, or act with evil intent against them?
Witness Šarru-ddn.
The troops of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, have entered the city Quhna, on the border of Arrapha, and are placing a garrison there.
I have not seen ...
We kept watch; we did not see the moon.
The king having sent us for good relations and peace to Babylon, we grasped the hands of the Babylonians, our brothers.
Witness Zarutî, chariot driver of the crown prince.
... my ...
Witness Sin-zeru-ibni, ...
Fingernail of Marduk-eriba, owner of the garden, land, and people being sold.
heard ...
If Scorpius is black: the king will carry radiance. Radiance is light.
This is the one who drove out Nabû-zēr-kitti-līšir, son of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), who had put his trust in the king of the land Elam, but could not save his life — Nabû-zēr-kitti-līšir, who had fled to me from the land Elam, grasped my feet when I, by the command of the gods Aššur, Bēl (Marduk), and Nabû, the
yet ...
... chariot-horse-trainer(s);
... the goddess Mullissu ...
in all, an estate of 4 hectares of land in the town of Ṣabat-Aššur, in the farmland of the town of Saṣu.
Does your great divinity know it? Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Witness Ilumma-le'i, cohort commander.
... he/I marched against ... his/its king ... his/its ... were numerous. I felled with the sword ... I carried off his/its booty... his/its ... were numerous. I felled with the sword ... I carried off his/its booty... his/its ... were numerous. I felled with the sword ... I carried off his/its booty...
If the earth quakes at night: worry for the land, variant: abandonment of the land.
The 'station' is present. The 'path' ... on the left ...
are going ...
... who ...
... Babylon
of Nabû-belu-ka''in ...
The city-lords around them have been defeated on (their) expedition; the troops of the king, my lord, have taken much plunder from them. The king, my lord, can be glad indeed.
(As for) Ḫanūnu of the city Gaza, he heard about the advance of my expeditionary force (while he was) inside the city Memphis, and (then) he fled inside the city Thebes. The kings, governors, (and) officials whom I had stationed in Egypt came to meet me and kissed my feet.
... x hectares of field in the village of Ṭab-... ,
From Zakir.
Shalmaneser, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also strong king, king of the universe, and king of Assyria:
Witness NN.
I am also sending to the king, my lord, a tablet by Šumaya, the  scribe of Adad-aplu-iddina. It is about the planet Venus. Venus is  shining very brightly right now, and it is (also) written in the  tablet of Adad-aplu-iddina: "Venus is shining brightly; this is  good for the king my lord." I have enclosed the relevant tablet  inside this letter.
... Aššur-ilaya,
Witness Puṭi-Aya.
I have given 500 sheep and 200 oxen in exchange for 200 sheep and 200 oxen.
If the moon becomes visible on the 30th day: there will be frost, variant: rumor of the enemy.
Witness Marduk-aplu-iddina, son of DN-...
Bel-na'id, son of NN, servant of NN and of Aššur-... -uṣur,
... -Issar, 3 towers;
Month Adar (XII), 10th day, eponym year of Mar-larim.
We kept watch on the 29th day; the place of observation was cloudy, we did not see the moon. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king my lord!
adjoining ...
... the temple of Nanaya
or Mukin-zeri or ...
Witness Riba-ilu.
Ditto by all the gods of Arbela!
By the command of the god Aššur, father of the gods, and the goddess Ištar, the queen, may the good šēdu (and) the good lamassu last forever and ever in that palace. May they never leave it. May they protect (the life of) Ashurbanipal, king of Assyria, and the life of his sons and his daughters.
6 oxen ...
... the gods on the left ...
... he is ...
adjoining the field of Nabû-duru-uṣur,
of ditto, 1 ditto, both of them, of Aššur-eṭir;
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. Good health to the king, my lord!
If a fog rolls in Shebat (XI): the land will go to ruin.
What have you done to me?
To the king, my lord: your servant Nergal-šumu-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
with the woman Safti-...
If a planet rises in Elul (VI): rising of business, thriving of grain.
When the god Enlil, my lord, entrusted me with the kingship of the lands, I was constantly assiduous about (showing) devotion to his divinity (and) I was speaking daily about doing what(ever) is pleasing to him. My mind pondered about making his divinity happy (and) making his divinity reside in Eḫulḫul, the temple which the great lord, the god Marduk, loves.
Ditto.
In the future, when the temple becomes old and dilapidated, and a king of my status, whom the god Marduk names for the renovation of Esagil and Babylon, finds its (original) emplacement (and) reaches the surface of the water, may he anoint an inscription written in my name with oil, make an offering, (and) return (it) to its place. The god Marduk, the great lord, will (then) hear his prayers.
The ... of his ... was loosened ... The people of the land ... took fright in the face of the radiance of Aššur and abandoned their cities. They ascended a rugged mountain (... ).
... to ...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the man whose name is written in this papyrus and whom Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, has taken into his entourage,
of Su...
Scholars of the king.
If the earth quakes at night: worry for the land, variant: abandonment of the land.
As to what you wrote to me: "May the king send a bodyguard to come and tell us what our obligation is" — the obligation is this: when the  (king of) Elam wrote to us, we wrote to the Palace. Now the Palace has  written to us, so we shall do accordingly.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... a mountain ...
(As for) the Cimmerians, a dangerous enemy who had never feared my ancestors, and, with regard to me, had not grasped the feet of my royal majesty, with the support of (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar, my lords, he (Gyges) clamped (them) in manacles, handcuffs, (and) neck-stocks and sent (them) before me, together with his substantial audience gift(s). I constantly saw the might of the gods Aššur and Ištar, who had encouraged me
... the magnates
(It is) in the hands of Nabû-zeru-iddina, mayor of Borsippa.
Your servant Aqar-Bel-lumur: I would gladly die for the king of the universe, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: I have sent my messenger to greet the king of the universe, the horses and the soldiers.
Witness Ašipâ.
I have heard it being reported of the king of Arzizi: "He has gone to Media." Is this true? If he has gone to Media, let my lord write to me, so I can send my messenger to greet him.
Witness Nabû-ahu-uṣur, scribe.
Concerning the substitute king about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "How many days should he sit (on the throne)?" —
2 houses in Nineveh, at the disposal of Kiṣir-Nabû, son of Nabû-aplu-iddina.
The 'well-being' is overturned. The gall bladder is recessed. The 'base of the throne' is present.
Total 4 Kushite horses,
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-alik-pani. Good health to the king, my lord!
He told me: "Bel-bulliṭ, the 'third man' of the deputy  (governor) has bought (them) from Aplaya for ...
If Adad shouts on the day of disappearance of the moon: the harvest will prosper; ...
Month Adar (XII), 22nd day, eponym year of Dananu of Marqasa.
The bakers take 10 homers of barley and 3 homers of wheat for the pandugāni ceremony of the king. The brewers take 12 homers of barley and 3 homers of wheat for the pandugāni ceremony of the king. In all 23 homers of barley and 6 homers of wheat going to the pandugāni of the king. This is apart from the regular offering of the king.
a total of 5 persons, owners of the vineyard being sold.
You shall not give Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, a deadly drug to eat or to drink, nor anoint him with it, nor practice witchcraft against him, nor make gods and goddesses angry with him.
I am also writing to you: make your brothers run after you, get together all the men of yours who are in your presence, and go ... !
Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
I roared loudly like a storm (and) thundered like the god Adad against all of the troops of the wicked enemies. By the command of the god Aššur, the great lord, my lord, I blew like the onset of a severe storm against the enemy on (their) flanks and front lines.
10 shekels of silver belonging to NN, at the disposal of Tab...
The forest, which is between the sanctuaries, is the hair of his armpits. The streams which flow into it are the hair of his groin. The birds which flit in it are the hair of his arms.
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
... Ilu-iṣṣur;
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial audience gift from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
until the ... s come.
... of ...
The 'path' is curled. The 'well-being' is present...
11 shekels of ... -silver;
The sons of the king, my lord, are at my disposal; should I let them go to the king, my lord?
in all x; 1 house.
1 ... ;
If the moon does not wait for the sun but sets: raging of lion and wolf.
1 cow of silver;
They are constantly ... me: "Why did you give the order to ... ?
x ... -sheep, of the offerings of the chief treasurer;
... I annexed to Assyria the lands Bīt-Ḫamban, Sumurzu, Bīt-Barrūa, Bīt-Zualzaš, (and) Bīt-Matti, the city Niqqu of the land Tupliaš, the lands Bīt-Taranzāya, Parsua, Bīt-Zatti, Bīt-Abdadāni, Bīt-Kapsi, Bīt-Sangi, (and) Bīt-Urzakki, (and
Like a fierce wild bull, with my select bodyguard and my merciless combat troops, I took the lead of them (the soldiers in my camp). I proceeded through the gorges of the streams, the outflows of the mountains, (and) rugged slopes in (my) chair. (iv 1) Where it was too difficult for (my) chair, I leapt forward on my (own) two feet like a mountain goat. I ascended the highest peaks against them. Where my knees became tired, I sat down upon the mountain rock and drank cold water from a water skin
Let me write down the entire word that Assurbanipal is speaking in the letter and let it be placed before the crown prince. Perhaps the crown prince will say: "Why did you not write down and send me the word of Assurbanipal?" I am now writing down and sending it to the crown prince.
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
2 minas for Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the goldsmith.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
the woman Sukkaya, 3 sons of hers,
Instead of their seals they impressed their fingernails.
The city Ḫarḫar, a fortress of the land Gurgum.
Anu, the Great Gods, Šalimtu, Šunipuru, Narudu, Kubu, Ningirsu, Ebeh, Belet-ili, Damkina, Ninurta, Nusku, Mandanu, Ningirsu, Nusku, Kakka, Šerua, Ningirsu, Kakka, Šunipuru:
Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, who is now ill and on whom the 'hand' of god Nanaya of Uruk is being placed in extispicy, (whom) your great divinity knows —
within ...
Iddin-apli, reporter.
ditto, the chief of accounts;
... Qibi-Bel ...
The bridal gift of the goddess Ištar ... has been completely paid off.
... Month Adar (XII), 22nd day, eponym year of NN.
The 16th day, when the god goes to ... , is the day of ... ;
... he did
Šumma-Aššur has contracted and bought them for 30 shekels of silver.
... the king, my lord, ...
in the charge of Aqaraya, son of the Hatalleans.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
May the lord of kings do as he deems best.
... s, ditto;
The maid whom I sent to the king, having told him: "The maid is  to be given (to) the harem manageress of the Inner City," he gave her to  the harem manageress of the Inner City, but he did not give her ... ; ... were taken from her.
... they should go
(When) the king seated me on the royal throne, he gave me great kings, strong weapons, and a mighty bow, the best of the equipment of the goddess Ištar, mistress of the gods; he put in my hand the great bow of the god Aššur, king of the gods, and the goddess Ištar, queen of the gods, and he made my arms strong.
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... Arrapha ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
NN has contracted and bought it from Šulmu-... for ...
I have appointed ... in the service of the treasurer, in the city of ... , and am herewith sending him with my sealed message.
To the king, my lord: your servant Issar-nadin-apli, the foreman of the collegium of ten (scribes) of Arbela. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
699 — the town of Sin-... ;
Witness Nabû-...
Aššur-da''in-šarru, NN, NN,
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
4 ... -garments of linen, ... ;
If he does not pay, it shall increase by a fourth.
8 wooden ... s ... for ... ;
... of the wineskins
This (omen) is from the series.
Concerning the news of the Philistines, in the city of Tyre a messenger of Mugallu the Melidean has come down to us, saying: "The son of Ahu-la-amašši has gone to the city of Adummatu.
As for me, when ... did not exist and the foundations of the throne of my priestly office were not yet in place, the god Sîn, the lord of the gods, my lord, entrusted to me the entirety of the land Ḫatti and (thereby) established my name forever. He gave me power, virility, (and) outstanding strength, and he placed in my hand a weapon to fell enemies.
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: good for Akkad, bad for Elam and the Westland.
Month of Iyyar (II), ... th day, eponym year of NN, governor of ...
... and to ...
... are coming up here
... of the Itu'eans ...
... of the house of the crown prince,
in Yasubu ...
Witness Qurdi-...
... the Ru'ua who
In Sivan (III) on the 11th day Jupiter stood where the sun shines forth; it was bright and its features were red, its rising was as perfect as the rising of the sun: angry gods will be reconciled with the king; the king will have complete dominion over his land; the king will achieve whatever he wants; the king's land will expand; the king will see his land prosper; the king will reach the highest rank; the king will have no rival.
... a man from Arrapha
they should act according to ...
... you are ...
I was not lazy, negligent, (or) careless. I sent my officials, the governors of the boundary areas of their land, with them and they trampled the people living in those cities (and) made (them) bow down at their feet. I imposed the tribute (and) payment of my lordship upon them.
Witness Mannu-ki-Arbail, son of Nur-Saggir.
Aya-yada' who is ...
Nabu-šumu-iddina is a competent ...
I decorated Emašmaš (and) Egašankalama with silver (and) gold, (and) filled (them) with splendor.
Afterwards, Teumman, the (very) image of a gallû-demon, sat on the throne of Urtaku. He constantly sought out evil (ways) to kill the children of Urtaku (and) the children of Ummanaldašu (Ḫumban-ḫaltaš II), the brother of Urtaku. Ummanigaš, Ummanappa, (and) Tammarītu — the sons of Urtaku, the king of the land Elam — Kudurru (and) Parrû — the sons of Ummanaldaš
Witness Imbî.
Bel-dan,
4 sheep ... ;
... s, 1 seah of sesame,
He (the king) sets up a table before Šamaš, and places ... and a censer of juniper behind the table. The ... s of the house of Šamaš are arranged in a circle around the censer of juniper. The singer intones, “... ” The ... s of the house of Šamaš ...
I sent ... after him, saying: "Let him return the captives!" But he refused ...
I have heard that the city of Paddira, which the king took, is under the control of Saniye, the commander-of-fifty. He refuses to give the city back to the king.
Witness NN, ša šēpi guard.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
I placed Esarhaddon, my first-born son, on his royal throne and entrusted him with the wide land of Sumer and Akkad.
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
Witness Aššur-šallim. Witness Kenî, baker.
... bi ...
I conquered the land Elam in its entirety. I carried off to Assyria its king, his court, his palace women, his sons, his daughters, his possessions, (and) the treasures of his palace. (v 100) I conquered the city Bīt-Imbî, (his) fortified city, whose location is situated between rivers. I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire that city, together with cities in its environs, and turned (them) into mounds of ruins (lit. “mounds and ruins
The 26th day: joy of heart.
... before ...
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhe, conscript.
... are present. The 'path' is present.
In my rage, I unleashed a fierce assault on Cutha, and (then) I slaughtered the warriors surrounding its wall like sheep and took possession of the city. I brought out horses, the Elamite, Aramean, (and) Chaldean archers, the Elamite unit commanders, and Nergal-nāṣir, together with the guilty citizens, and I counted them (as) booty.
Witness Šumma-Adad.
Five minas of silver by (the mina) of Carchemish belonging to Nergal-ahu-uṣur, eunuch of the king, at the disposal of Nabû-šumu-iddina, son of Hakkubu, and at the disposal of Dadî, silversmith.
Total, the ... of ... -Inurta.
Mannu-ki-Aššur, of the courtier corps;
6 bags of (mixed) kernels.
Nergal-uballiṭ,
Tablet of Aššur-killanni, the bodyguard.
He said: "Nabû-ušabši ...
Total of the magnates: 8 men, 8 women.
To the king, my lord: your servant PN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord.
Whoever in the future lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver, or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Urdu-Issar, his sons and his grandsons,
(As for) the people of the land Arzâ, a region of the land Mannea that Urtaku, the king of the land Elam, had annexed and appropriated for himself, I conquered that region... I smashed their hard stone walls like a potter’s vessel... I carried off 600 captives, (as well as) their possessions (and) their property... (As for) the city Arinu, the royal city of Urtaku, the king of the land Elam, I destroyed (it), demolished (it), (and) diss
Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria: Maniye, the king of the city Ukku, became frightened by my battle array, abandoned the city Ukku, a city upon which he relied, and fled far away. (As for) the population living inside it, who had flown away like birds to the peak of a rugged mountain, I pursued them and defeated them on the peak of (that) mountain. I burned the city Ukku, his royal city, with fire. I laid waste to the land Urarṭu (and) made its
Total: 3 (men), 1 woman, 1 horse in the charge of Bel-šarru-ibni.
To the king, my lord: your servant, Nadin-Aššur. May Aššur and Ištar bless the king, my lord.
Nergal-eresh,
... Calah ...
... city god
... to them
Ešuddegeštuku, “House whose prayers are heard”: the house of Belat-ekalli.
I asked the gods Šamaš and Adad and they answered me with a firm “yes.” I refurbished the emblem of her great divinity (and) made her sit upon a throne-dais as (her) eternal abode. I (re)confirmed her precious cultic ordinances and (re-)established her precious cultic ordinances which had been forgotten for a long time. I had the emblem of her great divinity skillfully made with gold, silver, (and) red gold, and I clothed her with a magnificent garment. I had a portrait of myself
Concerning what the king wrote to me: "What is this thing called 'hand-lifting' prayer?" — it is a prayer to be recited before Gula, and there is an apotropaic ritual  connected with it. Let the king perform it; it is very efficient.
... the chariot of ... is in the street of ...
The day you see this letter, take into your hands all the Arameans who are in your presence, whether those of Nergal-uballiṭ or those of the commander-in-chief, and lead them into my presence!
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of all the four quarters, sun(god) of all people, prince, vice-regent of Aššur, valiant man who acts with the support of Aššur (and) the god Šamaš, the gods his allies, and (thereby) has felled his foes, attentive prince who, by the command of the gods Aššur, Šamaš, and Marduk, the great gods, my lords, has gained control
1 female donkey-driver ... ;
... let them do
I have appropriated for myself the servants of the king, my lord, who are in  the Inner City, and those who are in Cutha. Now, should the ... s of the  king, my lord, ... in ... , I shall ... them.
with ...
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 21st day, eponym year of Dadî, treasurer.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let a messenger of yours come to my presence" — the messenger of mine whom I sent to the Palace came to my presence first. Now then, let Aššur-iddina, the cohort commander, come to the Palace and speak to the king, my lord.
... the god ... the goddess Tašmētu ... the god(dess) Ninlil ... the one who (re)constructed the temple of the god Aššur, (re)built Esagil and Babylon, ... who returned the plundered gods of the lands to their (proper) place from the city Aššur ... who ... the great lord, the god Marduk, ... who ... the god(dess) Zarpanītu ... who (re)confirmed the regular offerings (in) Esagil and Babylon ... who (re)conf
The one who crushed the Barnaki, a dangerous enemy, who live in the city Tīl-Ašurri, which is called Pitānu in the language of the people of the land Miḫrānu; the one who scattered the Mannean people, undisciplined Gutians — (as for) the land Patušarri, a district in the area of the salt desert, which is in the midst of the land of the distant Medes, borders Mount Bikni, (and) upon the soil of whose land none of the kings, my ancestors, had walked,
The charge of the rear palace is well. The king, my lord, can be glad.
Witness Ubru-Nabû, ...
Kakkullanu, son of Mannu-ki-Adda, has contracted and bought them for 1/2 mina of silver by the mina of the king.
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
Witness Bel-na'id, ditto.
1 ... -cloth, of Tukriš-Issar, the chariot-driver of the king, at the disposal of Yahuṭu.
The king, my lord, should know (this).
2, NN, chief ... ;
... the xth day;
... of the land of Nairi which are in the mountains, between Mount Nikippa and Mount Upâ, the kings of the land of Nairi who had not bowed down to my yoke, I had my camp pitched at the foot of Mount Upâ. (20) I myself, in an armchair, with my crack combat troops, entered the mountain, a difficult place, and I ascended with a struggle the steep mountain peaks.
Aššur-bani, the ... of Ilu-iqbi, who ... , has said to the men of the Itu'eans: "You are my men! I shall give you ... (and) equip you for the battlefield." Until now no Itu'ean has dared to go near the king's road, and you have not dared to enter into my presence.
If Adad shouts on a cloudless day: there will be darkness.
May Bel and Nabû, who give you confidence, not abandon you to the assembly of those who wish you ill! May they place in your hands dominion over kings and princes, and under your protection may they place the peoples of the four quarters! May Bel and Nabû give you command and attention, obedience and respect for your royal majesty!
The palace of Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria.
Concerning the ... about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... "
of the Palace Superintendent ... of the city of ...
... to make (those) planted areas luxuriant, I cut with iron picks a canal straight through mountain and valley, from the border of the city Kisiru to the plain of Nineveh.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
as we ...
I took the city Elenzaš as a royal city and a fortress for that district, then I changed its former name and called it Kār-Sennacherib.
1,000 (homers) of barley belonging to the harem manageress of the queen mother, at the disposal of Šulmu-beli-lamur, servant of ...
a long life-span
I sought and the ... of Aššur, my lord, I found out about his affairs. I wrote to the chief eunuch, who promptly sent a royal bodyguard to me. He took the matter up with him (= the merchant).
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
... he is a ... ;
He shall place a mina of refined silver and one mina of pure gold in the lap of the Lady of Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owner. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Witness Munnabitu, scribe.
... are making common cause with him.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Ask Bel-duri,  he knows the affairs of the Manneans well" —
to ...
The plunder of the land that ...
x minas of silver belonging to Bahianu, at the disposal of Am-kinu.
Witness Šulmu-beli-lamur, from Calah.
and when he ran away,
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether, (should) Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, appoint the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the position which is written in this papyrus,
100 bundles of reeds, each bundle more than a donkey can carry, must be at hand in Dur-Šarruken by the 1st of Kislev (IX).
... the fortress of ...
... who did not keep my treaty but sinned against ... and ... my favor ...
We have sent ... to NN and to ... , (but) they have not agreed ...
... Hulala, the maid of the queen ...
If at the sun's rising a cloudbank lies to its right: the right side of the land will become dry, variant: the west wind will blow.
... his ... , his people, his property
The god of the king, my lord, knows that ... is not a good thing.
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
Witness Adad-naṣir. A total of 10 witnesses from Ispallurê.
... I am writing to you
10 minas of silver, 10 minas of gold, 100 talents of bronze, 100 talents of iron, and one stone (for) the ... of the bed of the god Bēl (Marduk) in the procession of the goddess Zarpanītu.
He took it as a loan. It shall increase by a fourth.
... Witness Inurta-šarru-uṣur.
... to the guard
Ninurta-shezibanni, his son of 4 spans, and his sister,
Witness Nabû-šezib.
... nâ ...
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
x+8, in the charge of Metunu, the scribe of the king of Babylon.
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, ditto.
... s to the river
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
The money is paid completely. That ... is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
the deputy ...
As to the ... about which you wrote, they should ... where you told  them to ...
... they will remove, and ... they will attack.
... you, and the ...
The city Ṣiṣṣirtu.
... Nabû in front of ... the gods in the house of DN.
Should Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, appoint the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the position which is written in this papyrus?
In my eighth regnal year, Ursâ (Rusâ), the Urarṭian — who had transgressed the limits set by the gods Šamaš and Marduk and had not honored the oath (sworn) by the god Aššur, the king of the gods — (iii 15') mustered his troops (and) his large cavalry, which were stationed on the border of the land Mannea, and he came to the aid of the beleaguered people of the land Mannea. He opened up their paths (and) (iii 20
Zeru-ukin, son of Rīmūt-ilī,
The people living there were answering each other yes (for) no. They neglected their goddesses, abandoned their rites, (and) embraced quite different (rites). They put their hands on the possessions of Esagil, the palace of the gods, an inaccessible place, and they sold the gold, silver, (and) precious stones at market value to the land Elam. They sent their messengers to Indabibi, a servant who belonged to me, (saying): “Tell the mighty king ... to do obeisance to us, and ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šarru-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord.
... I did not give
... and if he sends them, should they go, take the road and ... to the city ... , as the king, my lord, wrote to me?
We shall write down the whole report and send it to the king, our lord. The  report of Haldi-Ia'u should be written down as well.
... does not agree
they will come and ... the horses
the watch of ...
The five rivers which flow into the Tigris from the mountains, from the east, (and) which the king, my lord, caused to be dammed — Aššur-šallim-ahhe has informed me as follows:
... who in his steadfast heart ... the exalted goddesses who sit upon (their) eternal dais ...
... , 4 persons;
a ditto of quinces;
... The middle 'finger' of the lung is split. The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are turned on the left ...
... the 'outside.'
3 1-year-old ewes:
Mars has entered the Old Man star, but it will not be regarded as an omen; it will not stand in it, it will not become stationary and not tarry; quickly it will move out of the Old Man star and go on into the sky.
I brought near ...
9 (cuts of) meat, the Review Palace;
So that the construction of my palace might be carried out correctly and that my handiwork be completed, at that time, the god Aššur and the goddess Ištar, who love my priestly service (and) who selected me (lit. “who called my name”), revealed to me a source of trunks of cedar, which since distant days grew tall and very thick as they stood in seclusion in the Sirāra mountain range.
The 'station' is present. The 'paths' are 2, the lower one is ... The 'well-being' is present. The 'path' on the left of the gall bladder is long and ...
To the king of the lands, my lord: your servant, Aššur-alik-pani. May Aššur, the great lord, and the gods of Assyria and Babylonia bless the king of the lands, my lord. May they grant him a life of long days, a destiny of longevity, a reign of prosperity, and ... of the kings of the four quarters. May they grant him the satisfaction of old age, extreme old age.
Let the king, my lord, write me what the king commands.
... before ...
... my ...
I have heard that Zabinu, son of Arda-Mullissi, has said to the son of Zabinu: "Go and speak with the son of Yakin, he will give you the house of your father."
... we shall do ... we shall not ...
The son of Daltâ has written to the merchant: "Let him come  quickly and bring the horse with him; I want to see him."
May Ninurta and Gula bestow happiness and physical well-being on my brother!
... , Treasurer;
40, the palace herald;
I brought Dunānu (and) his brother out of that city alive. I brought out his wife, his sons, his daughters, his (palace) women, male singers, (and) female singers and I counted (them) as booty. I brought out silver, gold, property, (and) the treasures of his palace and I counted (them) as booty. (vi 10') I brought out eunuchs, his attendants, engineers, (and) his food preparers and I counted (them) as booty. I brought out all of
let him give ...
4 Kushite horses from the commander-in-chief;
adjoining the estate of Ba... —
He shall pay the silver in its original amount on the first day of the month of Tishri (VII). If he does not pay, it shall increase by a fourth.
... at the disposal of Aššur-ila'i, ...
Indabibi, who sat on the throne of the land Elam after Tammarītu, knew about the might of my weapons that had  prevailed over the land Elam and (as for) the Assyrians whom I had sent (viii 85') to aid Nabû-bēl-šumāti, son of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), with whom they used to march about protecting his land like a friend and ally (and) whom Nabû-bēl-šumā
12 minas of silver belonging to Nergal-šarrani, the horse trader.
He recites a blessing for the tree and the seed.
Ditto by all the gods of Assyria and Babylonia!
1 duck, 10 turtledoves.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nashir-Bel. Good health to the king, my lord!
... Qišti-ilu,
Nabu-šezibanni,
6 straight garments, felted, the edging ... ;
I roared loudly like a storm (and) thundered like the god Adad against all of the troops of the wicked enemies. By the command of the god Aššur, the great lord, my lord, I blew like the onset of a severe storm against the enemy on (their) flanks and front lines. With the weapons of the god Aššur, my lord, and my fierce battle array, I turned them back and made them retreat. (v 80) I shot the troops of the enemy with uṣṣu-arrows (and) mulmullu
... of the palace manager
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), capable shepherd, favorite of the great gods, guardian of truth who loves justice, renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the insubmissive, (and) the one who strikes enemies with lightning:
I uprooted all of the Aḫlamû (Arameans) (and) Sutians. I put to the sword the inhabitants of the city Ḫirimmu, not sparing (any of) their offspring. I conquered the land of the Yasubigallians, a dangerous enemy. I ruined the land Ellipi and destroyed its settlements.
1 1/2 minas ... of the queen mother;
Ashur-dan (III),
The man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity ...
This (sluice) gate of the watercourse opened by itself without (the help) of spade or shovel and let an abundance of water flow through. Its (sluice) gate was not opened through the work of human hands. According to the heart’s desire of the gods, I made (it) gurgle with water. After I inspected the canal and made sure its construction was performed correctly, I offered pure sacrifices of fattened oxen (and) an abundance of sheep to the great gods, who march at my side (and) who make my reign secure. I cl
The chariot which goes to the Akitu House and comes back has no driver. Without a driver it rocks about.
The women of Muqallil-kabti.
If a fog rolls in Nisan (I): the land will go to ruin.
to to the crown prince of Babylon.
... the goddess Šarrat-nipha
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Feed the ṣīpu before Šamaš!" —
... the gods of the Šamaš temple.
to ...
the king, my lord, ...
To the 'farmer,' our lord: your servants Adad-šumu-uṣur and Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health to our lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless  our lord!
in the presence of ...
From Ašaredu.
Witness Balasî.
The king, my lord, may do as he deems best but I am powerless and have no influence over the men.
... I conquered and ... I plundered. The city Ḫalulê, together with the cities in its environs, I destroyed, demolished, (and) burned with fire.
The king has sent ...
I surrounded their (the palace rooms’) lower courses with slabs of breccia (and) alabaster, and large limestone slabs (and) made (them) an object of wonder.
... the delegate ...
Witness Il-immi.
... who are brought to us
... of oxen ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
I opened up a foundation pit for the outer wall, Badnigerimḫuluḫa, (which means) “Terrorizer of Enemies,” then I dug down forty-five nindanu and made (it) reach the water table. I bound together strong mountain stone in the water below and above I expertly carried out its construction with large limestone (blocks) up to its copings.
... Il-yada' ...
... I (and) the šandabakku
He shall give them back in Iyyar (II). If he does not, they shall increase by the same amount.
... are ...
In my dream, the great gods ...
in all x persons, servants of these gentlemen —
... to the king, my lord
has taken ...
Sphinxes of alabaster, as well as sphinxes of cast urudû-copper that were overlaid with zaḫalû-silver, and sphinxes of cast ... -metal, whose features were brilliant:  I erected over them columns of ebony, cypress, cedar, daprānu-juniper, juniper, and Indian wood, with pašallu-gold and silver inlays, and (then) I positioned the architraves of the inner rooms of my lordly residence (on those columns).
... to the presence of ...
... my message ...
Performed in Arbela.
... The coils of the colon are 16 in number...
As to what the king wrote to me: "The Itu'eans of the commander-in-chief have not been organized" —
I skillfully made a bed of musukkannu-wood, a durable wood, that is clad with pašallu-gold (and) studded with precious stones, as a pleasure bed for the god Bēl (Marduk) and the goddess Bēltīya (Zarpanītu) to carry out the wedding (and) to make love. I placed (it) in Kaḫilisu, the bed chamber of the goddess Zarpanītu, which is laden with sexual charm.
To the king, my lord: your servant, Nabû-šumu-ibni. Good health to the king, my lord. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord.
The king of the land of the Arabs (Aḫšēri) heard about the conquest of his cities and fear fell upon him. He abandoned the city (Aḫšēri) and fled far away. I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the city (Aḫšēri). I brought out of it every kind of possession (and) property, the treasures of his palace, and I counted (it) as booty. I destroyed, devastated, (and) turned into ruins his fortified cities. I burned with fire pavilions (and) t
To the king, our lord: your servants Nabû-zer-ketti-lešir and Salamanu. Good health to the king, our lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, our lord.
