I sent my officials, the governors of the boundary areas of their land, with them and they trampled the people living in those cities (and) made (them) bow down at their feet. I imposed the tribute (and) payment of my lordship upon them.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
11 Kushite horses from the personal guard of ... ;
5 minas, 3 shekels, 1/3 mina: the woman Uarbis, who was in Assyria.
... the 'outside' ...
why ...
... the lower part is elevated
Now then ...
in all an estate of 10 hectares ...
(As to) the reed which the king, my lord, sent me for, they have brought it to me but have not yet processed it.
Witness Barruqu, chariot driver.
I made the great gods who support me take up residence in their exalted inner sanctums. I offered sumptuous offerings before them (and) presented (them) with my gifts. I filled Eḫulḫul with joy and (then) made the radiance of the city Ḫarrān, to its full extent, shine like the appearance of the moon.
2 ... pots ... ;
Witness Urdu-Nabû, scribe.
... I carried off ... and 100 horses, and brought them to my city Aššur.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
I have sent ... to the Palace. The king, my lord, may do as he deems best.
... Qanâ, the ...
1, commandants of the ditto;
... the god Nergal, the most powerful one among the gods, with his fierce weapons, to fight with the army of the enemy, to overthrow the land of the enemy, to bring about the defeat of the enemy, and to protect the king, his lord,
4 horses — Aššur-eṭir, the treasurer.
40 hectares of field in the village of Napihu near the city of  Harran, belonging to the chief scribe.
Month Adar (XII), 12th day, eponym year of Bel-iqbi, governor of Tušhan.
... -šumu-iškun ...
Ahu-nuri ...
... the return of ...
... -ibni, his wife, ... , 1 son, 1 daughter, 3 (of) 4 spans' height; NN, his wife, 2 sons, 2 daughters, ... :
I had a canopy of musukkannu-wood, a durable wood, made and I clad its perimeter with thirty-four talents (and) twenty minas of reddish gold. I stretched out the canopy of the god Marduk, my lord, over the god Marduk, my lord, and (thus) secured its roof.
Nabû, Tukulti-Ninurta, Šamaš, Aya,
... of the god Aššur I built. I made the god Aššur enter inside it and made (him) dwell on (his) eternal dais.
When the god Šamaš, the great judge of the gods, who decides the fates, entrusted to me the leadership of all of the black-headed (people), he placed at my disposal the four quarters (of the world) and (thereby) I returned the gods to their shrines and made (them) reside in their dwelling(s) again. I (re)confirmed their interrupted sattukku offerings and (thereby) made the angry gods happy. I (re-)established the interrupted nindabû offerings (in) all of the cult centers
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether ... or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his ... , or ... ,
Witness Mannu-ki-Ninua, scribe.
... the god Adad released his rains (and) the god Ea opened up his springs. Grain was five cubits high in its furrow (and) ear(s) of corn were five-sixths of a cubits long. Successful harvest(s and) an abundance of grain enabled pasture land to continually flourish, fruit orchards to be very lush with fruit, (and) cattle to successfully give birth to (their) young. During my reign, there was plenitude (and) abundance; during my years, bountiful produce was accumulated.
... is the ... of your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord.
If Jupiter becomes steady in the morning: enemy kings will be reconciled.
... Iau-ašared
... , a ditto of soup;
10 shekels of silver, capital, belonging to Aššur-nadin-apli, at the disposal of Qurdi-Adad.
Witness Sa'ilu, porter.
... of the land Ḫalaḫḫu ... I brought him to my city Aššur. I made him take an oath by the great gods ... I imposed upon him the payment of tribute and ... I imposed upon him the payment of horses. (5') ... I made him take an oath by the great gods ... I imposed upon him the payment of tribute and ... I imposed upon him the payment of horses. Annually, without ceasing, I received from him the payment of my lordship (and) the payment of the gods of my land. (10') ... I made
Aššur, who goes to the Akitu House, ...
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
The king, my lord, knows that the Assyrians hold a whole district in the  province of Isana. They have set up a whole network of forts there, and  have made it (the region) unrecognizable for the pack animals. A messenger  of the king should come and have a look at the work I have done there,  and (then) he will recognize (the region) and the pack animals will (again) be  able to pass through it.
horses ...
(As for) Gyges, the king of the land Lydia — a region on the opposite shore of the sea, a remote place, the mention of whose name none of the kings, my ancestors, had (ever) heard — (the god) Aššur, (the god) who created me, made him see in a dream my royal name. On the (very) day he saw this dream, he sent his mounted messenger to inquire about my well-being.
Ribate, camel driver, 3 persons; ... ; Am-yata', camel driver, single; Ahu-iddina, camel driver, single; ... ;
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Witness Šarru-emuranni.
The boats of the people of Babylon and Borsippa are not coming  to the quay of the Inner City; they are mooring at the quay of the  Lower City. The ... is not bringing them over.
The money is paid completely.
The palace of Adad-nārārī, king of the universe, son of Arik-dīn-ili, king of Assyria, son of Enlil-nārārī (who was) also king of Assyria: (brick) belonging to the forecourt of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh.
Why does Nabû-ahhe-iddina keep on sending me letters and not  receiving my reply? Is it because he has become afraid? Now let him come  and receive my reply, and let me hear his report!
I have now written to him: "Let Marduk-eriba and NN come, and let them ... with you; if not, let Aššur-šallim come and take over the commandantship of GN. As for you, stay and work (hard), and when the time is right let one of you come and remove the ... from GN."
If a planet becomes visible in Shebat (XI): the enemy will plunder in the land.
Bel-naṣir, ... , the scribe of the king, owner of the vineyard.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Uarbis or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or his prefect or the mayor of his city or any relative of his, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Remanni-Adad, his sons and his grandsons,
A tablet of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, to the eunuch of Šarru-lu-dari, his brother. Good health to my brother!
Month Tebet (X), 25th day, eponym year of Abi-ram (677 B.C.).
the staff bearer ...
... and ...
The hand of Riša-...
Ditto by Nikkal of Arbela!
... and ... the lower fortress
in all 400, at 1 seah each.
Sîn-šarra-uṣur, the favorite brother of the king, my lord, is very well. May the gods of heaven bless him before the king, my lord!
... and the dead one
The king, my lord, should ask ... whether in the whole ... anything has been put aside.
Ubru-apli, ditto, ... ;
All these are missing from the royal (deserters).
... his servant NN
If a planet becomes visible in Elul (VI): the cemetery of warriors will expand.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Aplaya or his sons or his grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Zazî,
(As for) Aššur-lēʾi, the son of Aššur-uballiṭ (I), whose father had fled to the land Elam before the father of the father who had engendered me — after I had installed Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II) as king in the land Elam, he (Ummanigaš) seized Aššur-lēʾi, the son of Aššur-uballiṭ (I), (and) sent (him) before me.
My father saw me and rejoiced greatly. He said: "You have put the enemy under your foot! Now you will rule the land of Akkad; and after you ... , your son will rule the land of Akkad. This is good for Akkad."
... your father, who was killed in the enemy country, ...
... the image
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Concerning the ...
Witness Nabû-...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Riṣiṣu or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or his prefect or any relative of his, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Aplaya and his sons and his grandsons,
is splitting ...
If the earth quakes in Shebat (XI): fall of the army of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians.
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
News of the son of Yakin: he is in ...
... the king, my lord ...
If on the 15th day the moon and sun are seen together: a strong enemy will raise his weapons against the land; the enemy will tear down my city gate.
Witness Se'-šimanni.
The king, my lord, can be glad indeed about the forts and the troops  of Bit-Dakuri.
Now, what does the king, my lord, command? If the gods of the king, my lord, have taken action, let the king, my lord, send word, and let the gods of the king, my lord, be taken out and put aside! May the gods of the king, my lord, (otherwise) hold the king, my lord, responsible for the (bad) omen!
a writing-board ...
Witness Aplu-uṣur, ...
who ... with them ...
Just as gall is bitter, so may you, your women, your sons and your daughters be bitter towards each other.
(Property) of Atalia, queen of Sargon (II), king of Assyria.
among their ...
Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, true shepherd, favorite of the lord of lords, pious prince, beloved of the goddess Zarpanītu — the queen, the goddess of the entire universe — reverent king who from the days of his childhood was attentive to their rule and praised their valor, pious slave, humble, submissive, the one who reveres their great divinity — the goddesses Ištar,
Month Tishri (VII), ... th day, eponym year of Aššur-duru-uṣur (652).
Ilu-iqbi,
after ...
they placed him ...
... have been brought in
... the prefects ...
Now, if the king, my lord, orders, ...
thrice I marched to the lands Nairi (and) conquered the extensive lands Nairi from the land Tummu to the land Daiēnu and the Upper Sea in the west. I gained dominion over the entire land Ḫatti. I annexed to Assyria the lands Ḫatti, the city Arbela, (and) the lands Nairi.
... Aššur-mukin-pale'a;
The messenger of the king of Elam who came to us said: "The ... of the king of Assyria has captured us."
I cut down musukkannu-trees (and) cypress trees grown in the orchards (and) marsh reeds from the swamps and I used (them) in the work required (to build) my lordly palatial halls.
... in the palace
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 6th day, eponym year of Bel-lu-dari, governor of Kurbail.
The Tebilti River, a tempestuous flood (of water) which had flowed from distant days by the side of the palace and which had shaken its base when its flood was in full spate:
Witness Nabû-dur-beliya.
To Sîn-aḫu-uṣur:
You sing, “O Lord, you are magnificent in heaven.”
... the captives whom he detained ...
(As for) the one who destroys an inscribed object bearing my name, (the name of) my father, (and the name of) my grandfather, (or) does not place (it) with an inscribed object of his (own), may the gods Sîn, Šamaš, Adad, and the great gods of heaven and netherworld overthrow his kingship, curse his reign, (and) make his name (and) seed disappear from the land. May a king who is his enemy take away his throne and under his very eyes rule his land.
of my house ...
The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The king, our lord, should send (word) that they should ask (him) how much straw there is left, and he will (then) tell them. If there is none, the king should write to us that we should fetch it from elsewhere. We will fetch it and give it to them, and they will do the work.
... they have loaded
There is a 'weapon'-mark in the 'yoke.' The top of the right surface of the 'finger' is split. The 'cap' rides upon the 'outside.'
I killed ten strong bull elephants in the land Ḫarrān and the region of the River Ḫabur (and) four live elephants I captured. I brought the hides and tusks (of the dead elephants) with the live elephants to my city Aššur. I made a colossal royal statue of myself (and) wrote thereon (a description of) my royal victories. I erected (it) in the forecourt of the god Aššur, my lord.
Witness Tabalayu.
Let them fetch the logs and bring them to me.
NN, gate-guard;
The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
Concerning the ... about which Aššur-... wrote to me, I have sent the men ... who were with him; they will bring the wood.
Now then I have assigned them to their care.
... Witness Bel-upahhir.
(As for) the people of the land Akkad who had not escaped my weapons, they saw the defeat of their kings on the outskirts of the city Susa and fear of (the god) Aššur, my lord, overwhelmed them. They abandoned their cities and fled to the city Dūr-Yakīn, a city on the shore of the sea. (v 100) By the command of the god Aššur, my lord, I captured them alive in the midst of the sea and brought them to Assyria. I placed a representative (of mine)
Witness Mannu-...
The ... of Aššur-šumu-iddina, the ... of Aššur-šumu-iddina, the ... of Aššur-šumu-iddina, the ... of Aššur-šumu-iddina, the ... of Aššur-šumu-iddina, the ... of Aššur-šumu-iddina, the ... of Aššur-šumu-iddina, the ... of Aššur-šumu-iddina, the ... of Aššur-
To the king, my lord: your servant, Nabû-šumu-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord. May Aššur, Sin, Šamaš, Bel, Nabû, Nergal, Ištar of Nineveh and Ištar of Arbela call vigour, health, happiness, physical well-being and lasting days for the king, my lord.
Afterwards, Uallî, his son, sat on his throne. He saw the might of the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl (Marduk), Nabû, Ištar of Nineveh, Ištar of Arbela, Ninurta, Nusku, (and) Nergal, the great gods, my lords, and bowed down to my yoke. For the preservation of his (own) life, he opened up his hands to me (and) made an appeal to my lordly majesty. (
A thigh, a shoulder, outer cuts,
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 9th day, eponym year of La-baši, chief of trade (657 B.C.).
2 thighs, a shoulder, outer cuts;
(As for) the Cimmerians, a dangerous enemy who had never feared my ancestors, and, with regard to me, had not grasped the feet of my royal majesty, (ii 10') with the support of the gods Aššur, Bēl (Marduk), and Nabû, the great gods, my lords, he (Gyges) clamped (them) in manacles, handcuffs, (and) neck-stocks and sent (them) before me, together with his substantial audience gift(s). (ii 15') I
(But) as for the one who erases my inscribed name or the name of the king, my lord, by some crafty device, or (who) destroys my royal inscription, or changes its position, may the goddess Ištar, the great lady, speak evil of him before the god Bēl (and) the goddess Bēltīya (and) make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the lands!
We shall send the (relevant) document to the effect that he should produce.
(As to) what the king, my lord, wrote to his servant: "...
Seal of NN, ... ,
I had a canopy, which rivals the heavens, made from musukkannu-wood, a durable wood. I clad its perimeter with thirty-four talents (and) twenty minas of reddish gold and (thereby) reinforced its bonds. I stretched out its covering over the god Marduk, the great lord, and (thus) secured its roof.
Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the governor of Nineveh;
... the temple of Nabû ...
their sons ...
8 homers.
I have now written down the man's details on a writing-board and am herewith sending him to the king, my lord.
... minas of silver
... to the city of Akkad
Witness NN.
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), offspring of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, descendant of Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria —
As to the news of the king of Elam, I have sent to the king, my lord, all the information that I have heard.
... these
The king, my lord, should give orders to the chief eunuch and to the commander-in-chief: they should set up a reed altar in the house of Anu, and they should bring the altar into the presence of the king, my lord.
If at the moon's appearance one horn meets the other: the flood will come. — The moon will complete the day.
At that time the temple of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, which ... a prince who preceded me had previously built — that temple had become dilapidated and I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I rebuilt the temple from top to bottom. I made it larger than before. I built within it a lofty dais (and) an awesome sanctuary for the abode of the goddess Ištar, my mistress. I deposited my monumental inscriptions.
(If) a snake keeps scaring (people) in a temple: the offerings of that temple will continue for a long time.
... the 'crucible'
Good health to the king, my lord!
... the goddesses Tašmētu, Nanāya, (and) Uṣur-amāssu.
... we have departed
Witness Kannunayu.
It is true that the day you see this letter my messenger is going to the Palace.
I sent a eunuch of mine, the chief eunuch, to the land Elam. He went and concluded a treaty with Ummanaldašu (Ḫumban-ḫaltaš III), son of Atta-metu, (and) Tammarītu, the king of the land Elam. (vii 10') He made them swear an oath by the great gods, and then he brought them to Assyria, before me. I placed Ummanaldašu (Ḫumban-ḫaltaš III), on his throne
(As for) Ummanaldašu (Ḫumban-ḫaltaš III), the king of the land Elam, he heard about the entry of my troops, who had entered inside the land Elam; he abandoned the city Madaktu, a royal city of his, and (then) fled and took to the mountains (lit. “ascended his mountain”). (i 20) Ummanaldašu, together with the kings, governors, (and) officials whom I had stationed in the land Elam, (and) the rest of the people of
Witness Marduk-šarru-uṣur, cohort commander.
1 house, 2 ... ,
2 tureens of bouillon;
adjoining the town of Sahiru,
If Adad thunders ...
3 ... s of Huziru, of 1 seah each;
Month ... , 19th day, eponym year of Marduk-šarru-uṣur.
Ashur-bani, ... ; Abi-rahî, chariot driver;
Aššur-nirka-da''in,
The baths of Šamaš: the baths of the ša-šēpi guard.
At that time, I made the enemy people whom I had captured carry baskets (of earth)
... I have sent ...
The base of the middle 'finger' of the lung is 'bound.'
The king has sent me (with) the following orders: "Let the ... be performed on the 30th day, and let the horses be hitched up for the review on the 31st day."
10 ...
What is it that the king, my lord, orders?
Nabû-šumu-iddina ...
... me, the Chaldean ...
The king's word to the commander-in-chief:
The king came out. He strewed salt on the tables in the qirsu-enclosure of the god Sîn.
May he tie a white horse at the feet of Aššur, and may he bring four harbakannu horses to the feet of Nergal.
Witness Nabû'a.
Witness Šep-...
Witness NN. Witness Aya-yababa.
adjoining a street,
... in one ditch
If a bird carries flesh, a bird or anything, and drops it into the house of a man, the said man will receive a large inheritance.
Adad-le'i, prefect;
there ...
Witness ... -ili, ...
The temple of the god Aššur, my lord, I (re)built from top to bottom. I deposited my monumental inscriptions.
I built (and) completed that palace from its foundations to its battlements.
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me in the sealed order, saying: "The Itu'eans who are in my entourage should go with you" — they have already gone with me twice. When I returned from the second time, the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why did they return ... ?"
the ... of Anunitu ...
Because I have been treating you like this ... , may the god NN and the goddess GN bless you, may they keep you alive and well ... , may your reign be secure ... !
at the disposal of Bel-... -iqbi,
... the son of ... my father
I conquered the lands Ulluba (and) Ḫabḫu, which are (located) behind Mount Nal, in their entirety. I annexed to Assyria the cities Ušqaya, Bānītu, (and) Tīl-Ḫumba, the lands Ulluba (and) Ḫabḫu, the city Pappa, the city Kappar-Marduk-šarrāni, the city Ša-pī-Bēl, the city Aḫšēri, the city I
(As for) Nabû-šuma-ēreš, the šandabakku (governor of Nippur) who did not honor (my) treaty, he suffered from dropsy, (that is) “full water.”
... of Inurta-...
100 ... horses,
... , Bel-eṭir the scribe, and Adad-milki-ereš, the chief ... , have come to me, saying: "The king's eunuchs ... "
Witness Marduk-šakin-šumi, royal bodyguard.
We are now waiting for the solar eclipse (to pass); if it passes by (and) there is no solar eclipse, we shall look for it on the 14th day.
The king knows that I am but a dog of the palace, and that I have  always been loyal to the king and the crown prince.
The man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity ...
... very
I will go ...
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
May Marduk and Zarpanitu bless the king!
Whoever in the future, at any time, whether these men or their sons or grandsons, seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Šumma-ilani, shall pay 10 minas of silver. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
... 1 "litre"
11th day.
and his people, ... ,
News of the Urarṭian: ... has entered Waisi on the 12th with the following message: "The Urarṭian has written to the ... ean: 'Send me ... !'"
He shall pay in Iyyar (II).
The one who crushed the Barnaki, a dangerous enemy, who live in the city Tīl-Ašurri, which is called Pitānu in the language of the people of the land Miḫrānu; the one who scattered the Mannean people, undisciplined Gutians — (as for) the land Patušarri, a district in the area of the salt desert, which is in the midst of the land of the distant Medes, (30) borders Mount Bikni, (and) upon the soil of whose land none of the kings, my ancestors
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
At that time, by the command of Aššur, the great lord, my lord, Kudur-Naḫundu (Kudur-Naḫḫunte), the Elamite, did not last three months and suddenly died a premature death. After him, Umman-menanu (Ḫumban-menanu), who does not have sense or insight, his younger brother, sat on his throne.
to ... the king, my lord
Witness ... a, son of Bel-duri.
— Venus stands in the east.
a cup of olives;
If he appoints him, as long as he holds this position, will he instigate an insurrection and rebellion against Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, and Assurbanipal, the crown prince of the Succession Palace, or cause others to instigate it?
The city Ḫarḫar, which had rebelled (and) sided with Raḫiānu (Rezin), I conquered in the eponymy of Ashurbanipal, king of Assyria. I carried off ... , together with their possessions, (and) brought (them) to my city Aššur. I reorganized that province (and) imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the gods of my city Aš
... the deportees who are in ...
... their ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health  to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Izzia, the maid of Hiriṣi —
A thigh, a shoulder, outer cuts;
I am writing to the king, my lord, (that) the king should not listen to any rumours that are being spread around. Let the king, my lord, rely on the information that he has received from me, and let him be confident.
... , Bel-ibni, my slave
Tiglath-pileser, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Aššur-rēša-iši (I), vice-regent of the god Aššur:
to ...
The king, my lord, should quickly send a sealed order to Zabdî. He should appoint someone in his place over them, and the king, my lord, should send (word) to the commandant that he should release them.
Witness Saka-kašid.
... the governor of Harran
Witness Gagî,  chariot driver.
a 2-seah jar of beer of bruised grain.
... the tents in the house ...
... ;
I said: "... will come ... "
with 30 women ...
... I gave to him
Nabu-belu-usur,
... the king should ...
who with us ...
Palace of Shalmaneser, great king, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also strong king, king of the universe, and king of Assyria.
... the king, my lord
... the town of Urdiya near the city of Harbate;
to Abbâ the ...
... the Gambulu ...
... the front red, of the country;
If Jupiter is bright: the king of Akkad will reach the highest rank; the king of Akkad will become strong and have no rival; the cattle of Akkad will lie in the steppe undisturbed; there will be joy among the people; the king will become happy; the throne of the king will last long.
seed corn ...
I have sent ... to the king, my lord; he will return and settle (the matter) with them in the king's presence. The king should not hold me responsible for (any) omission (or) negligence.
The king, in the presence of ...
— On the 14th day the moon is seen together with the sun.
of NN, chariot driver of the queen mother;
The king, my lord, can be glad indeed. The god has remembered his servant, and has given him a fine present. The city of Aššur, the great cult centre, the residence of his great divinity,
until I have passed by ...
We have written to the king, our lord, (about) the matter which we heard. If  it is acceptable to the king, our lord, we shall write to the royal bodyguard  about it. We shall also write to the royal bodyguard about the news of the  Sheep Gate.
We have not yet received the silver from the chief cupbearer.
I have sent the letter to the king, my lord, as soon as I heard it.
May Bel and Nabû let the king, my lord, see them prosper!
The king should not let this pass over in silence. Let the king send a royal bodyguard to investigate (the matter); he should speak with the prefect and the cohort commander, and establish the truth.
Total 1,112 — (governor of) Que.
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
... to greet ...
2 ditto, exorcists' lore,
NN ...
Now I have written to my lord about the horses of the Gurreans,  (as well as) those of the Itu'eans and the chief of trade.
... &  his people,
... Akkad
Seal of NN, owner of the women being sold.
Marduk-eriba, servant of Ša-Nabû-šû —
of the statues ...
Witness ... -ili.
The house of Aššur-šallim, the house of Aššur-šallim, the house of Aššur-šallim, the house of Aššur-šallim, the house of Aššur-šallim, the house of Aššur-šallim, the house of Aššur-šallim, the house of Aššur-šallim, the house of Aššur-šallim, the house of Aššur-šallim, the house of Aššur-
... I said to the king, my lord: "... will not submit to the king, my lord."
On the 2nd of Elul (VI) I sent the bodyguard to the city of Ṣimirra.
Witness Nabû-da''inanni, ditto.
Witness Mannu-lu-šulmu.
will the chief eunuch of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, and his troops and army who are in Bit-Kari, march about wherever they wish in the district of Karkaššî and will they, either in going or returning, escape, be saved, save themselves, or extricate themselves from the troops of the Medes, from the troops of the Manneans, and from any other enemy?
in ...
... of the ... s
The palace of Amēl-Marduk, the great courtier, the grand vizier of the Succession Palace.
Month of Sivan (III), eponym year of Bel-na'id, governor of ...
Aššur-bēl-šamê, the son of Adad-nārārī (I), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of Aššur, restorer of the temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, his lady.
... I took the road to the land Ḫanigalbat. Tanutamon heard about the advance of my expeditionary force and that I had set foot on the territory of his land, he abandoned the city Memphis and, in order to save his (own) life, he fled inside the city Thebes. The kings, governors, (and) officials whom I had stationed in Egypt came to meet me and kissed my feet. (v 100) They implored me to spare Thebes, their city, (and) they begged me to let (the city) live
of the king, my lord, has been sent ...
He shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed. The judge shall not heed his case.
a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
x vineyards in the town of Bel-lu-balaṭ, a gardener and his people.
The exorcist ...
... field of Arihi in the town of ...
That which is (written) upon it (the throne) at the foot of the bed in the bedroom of the god Bēl (Marduk) in the city Bīt-Dūrī.
... day ...
2 'litres' of midru-bread; 2 'litres' of spiced bread.
... The king, my lord, should know it.
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
The king has set out and is on his way; he will be in the  presence of the king, my lord, by the time he returns.
By the word of the god Šamaš, the light of the gods, and the god Marduk, the king of the gods, may the good šēdu (and) the good lamassu last forever and ever in that palace. May they never leave it.
On my eighth campaign, I marched against Dunānu, son of Bēl-iqīša, to the land Gambulu, which had put its trust in the king of the land Elam (and) had not bowed down to my yoke. With my mighty battle array, I covered the land Gambulu in its entirety like a fog. I conquered the city Ša-pī-Bēl, his fortified city, whose location is situated between rivers.
As to the cavalrymen about whom the king, my lord, wrote me
An estate of x hectares of land adjoining the road that leads from ... to the village of Nabû-...
... as the king, my lord, ...
Nabû-ahu-iddina of Bit-... , of the ... of NN.
... s
Witness Issar-šumu-iddina, scribe.
Ditto, ditto; may they (= all the gods) break your bow and subject  you to your enemy; may they turn over the bow in your hands and make  your chariots run backwards.
The king, my lord, wrote to me: "Write me truthfully" — I am speaking the truth to the king, my lord.
Ditto by Ištar, lady of warfare! Ditto by Belet-ili, lady of the lands!
The heart of the ram is normal.
... is his ... The palm frond is his whiskers.
Witness Gimillu, ...
The charge of the rear palace is well. We are doing (our) work and stay awake (with him) unremittingly, and we pray to the gods. The king, my lord, can be glad.
... bedroom ...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Hattayu or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or his prefect or the mayor of his city or any relative of his or any neighbour of his, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Mannu-ki-ahhe and his sons and his grandsons, shall place 10 minas of refined silver and one mina of pure gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners.
Witness Na'di-Adad.
The people of Akkad, young and old, all those in the temples and palaces, as many as the gods Sîn and Šamaš named me for, and (all) those over whom I gained dominion, (namely) the inhabitants of the cities Ḫarḫar, Kish, Ḫursagkalama, Cutha, (and) Sippar, as many as there are, from the rising sun to the setting sun, (and) all those who dwell in the settlements in between, (namely) the inhabitants of the cities D
... , ...
The day you see this letter ...
... of the temple ... the house of Merodach-Baladan ...
Witness Remut-ili.
The priest of Adad wears a golden crown.
... the Assyrian ... in the mountain ...
they will take ...
The report on the land of the Mannean which I sent to the king, my lord, is reliable information.
... the king of Babylon ... the god Marduk ... the god Marduk ... the king of Babylon ... the king of Babylon ... the king of Babylon ... the king of Babylon ... the king of Babylon ... the king of Babylon ... the king of Babylon ... the king of Babylon ... the king of Babylon ... the king of Babylon ... the king of Babylon ...
... and ... I placed on his throne. I installed ... s in ... I placed a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over them.
... his sons
Nabû-shezibanni, ditto;
... to the presence of the king ...
Total, of Šulmu-ahhe, the son of Aplî.
to ...
Let the king, my lord, send a bodyguard to ... Aššur-... , and let them fetch the stone thresholds from the Inner City, and let them lay them in the foundations! The stone thresholds of the ... are many!
Urad-Nabû, the son of Bel-eṭir, who is now ill, and on whom the 'hand' of Nanaya of Uruk is being placed in extispicy —
If an eclipse takes place in the evening watch, the king ...
Witness Šar-Issar, ...
1 hand-ring of gold, 1/4 shekel in weight; 1 arm-ring of gold, 1/3 (mina) in weight; 1 finger-ring, 1/4 (mina) in weight; 1 arm-ring of silver, 1/3 (mina) in weight: all to the lady of the house.
By the command of my great divinity it came about that:
At that time, the temple of the goddess Ištar, mistress of Nineveh, my mistress, which Aššur-dān (I), vice-regent of Aššur, son of Tiglath-pileser (I) (who was) also vice-regent of Aššur, had previously built — (this temple) had become dilapidated and I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I completed it from top to bottom and deposited my monumental inscription.
owner of the ... being sold.
Witness NN, cohort commander.
In the month Adar (XII), day and night, the god Marduk, my lord, was happy and his mood was joyful. The god Marduk, my lord, commanded that the gate of Esagil be opened towards the south.
... outside ...
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Let Ašipâ come and settle (the matter) with them" — he has come, and I have sent him to the king, my lord. He says: "The men who sinned against the king, my lord, are at my feet. If the king, my lord, commands, I shall bring them to the king, my lord. If not, I shall settle (the matter) with them here. I have written to the son of Daltâ, (telling him): 'The men who sinned against the king,
The men of the house of the palace herald have not come out to do their state service.
Does your great divinity know it? Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Samsi-ila'i, courtier;
... his ...
Review Palace of Nineveh;
... ni,
The coils of the colon are ... in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
a flagon of beer of bruised grain.
... the Lady of Nineveh
Witness Šarru-emuranni, chief singer.
... I built (and) completed ... from its foundations to its crenellations... I made (it) greater than before... I made (it) the equal of the heavens... (rev. 5') ... I made (it) the equal of the heavens... (and) I raised (it) up to the heavens... its site was too small; I made its foundation larger than before... I made its foundation as firm as the heavens.
... the men who fled
From Ašaredu the younger, servant of the king.
... his ... in his mouth
Witness Adad-šumu-iškun, ...
total, the temple steward.
... and ... the Hamureans
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... 34 ditto ditto ditto, of the country;
As to what you wrote me: "...
Total, Aššur-matu-taqqin, village manager.
a total of 190 Kushite horses and 350 cavalry mounts —
... they are plotting
May the king, my lord, write to his servant that he may do ... !
... I am not strong enough to ... against them. Let the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
... the Hamaraneans
From Issar-šumu-ereš.
have been brought to me ...
... s, in all 62 (cuts of) meat, a jar of wine,
... ;
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šumu-iddina. The very  best of health to the king, my lord! May the gods of Ešarra bless the  king, my lord!
In the eponymy of Šulmu-beli-lašme, the governor of Der, the city Ḫarḫar, the city Riḫiṣu, (and) the city Apparu, (iv 5') which the king, my lord, had subdued at the command of Aššur and the goddess Ištar, the king of the land Elam heard about the conquest of his cities and fear fell upon him. He sent his messenger to Aššur to do obeisance (and) to do obeisance
of the king ...
Witness Adad-naṣir, ...
He has taken it as a loan from Palil-ereš.
... the king, my lord
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
Witness Nabû-...
... there are
The king's word to NN: I am well; you can be glad.
3 bags of sesame;
Witness Isanayu.
... to Merodach-Baladan
NN and his people, ... ,
The kings of the land Ḫatti, the seacoast, and the Amanus range, from Tummu to Sibitti, (and) the kings of the land Amurru, the entirety of Mount Lebanon, (and) the Great Sea, from the city Arwad to the city Byblos, (5) (and) the entirety of Mount Amanus, which is before the land Ḫatti — with the strength of the god Aššur, my lord, I conquered from the source of the River Subnat to the source of
... will he ... ?
The name of the other one is Šamaš-šallimanni; he is the ... of the house of ...
... the temple of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, which ... who preceded me had previously built — (this temple) had become dilapidated and I rebuilt it from top to bottom. I deposited my monumental inscriptions.
A play in three acts. Shamash-belu-usur, the usurper.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-iqbi. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it? Does your great divinity know it?
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
On my eighth campaign, I marched against Dunānu, son of Bēl-iqīša, to the land Gambulu, which had put its trust in the king of the land Elam (and) had not bowed down to my yoke. With my mighty battle array, I covered the land Gambulu in its entirety like a fog. I conquered the city Ša-pī-Bēl, his fortified city, whose location is situated between rivers.
Witness NN, scribe.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
... is wide ...
The city Adummatu, the fortress of the Arabs, which Sennacherib, king of Assyria, (my) father, who engendered me, conquered and whose goods, possessions, (and) gods, together with Apkallatu, the queen of the Arabs, he plundered and brought to Assyria — Hazael, the king of the Arabs, (ii 1) came to Nineveh, my capital city, with his heavy audience gift and kissed my feet. He implored me to give (back) his gods and I had pity on
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: good for Akkad, bad for the Westland.
When in the presence of the king, who ... ?
Dayan-Inurta,
And ... is coming up and down again and again.
Witness Riba-ahhe.
Month of Ša-sarrāte, eponymy of Nabû-dūrī-uṣur (672 B.C.).
of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, ...
Disregard what happens after my stipulated term...
From Balasî.
... has been done. The ... has been put in place. The ... has been put in place. The ... has been put in place. The top of the ... has been trimmed.
At that time, Nabû, the exalted lord, the pre-eminent heir, the noble one, ... the leader of all of the Igīgū gods, the one who controls the Anunnakū gods, the great lord, my lord, who holds the bond of heaven and underworld, the one who opens springs, the one who walks the wide underworld, the lord of the crown, the one who dwells in Ezida, the great lord, my lord, who dwells in Borsippa, the great lord, my lord, who dwells in Sip
They have detained my brother at the city gate, saying: "He will  enter into the presence of the son of Yakin. Let the son of Yakin ...
May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May they give to the king, my lord, long days and  everlasting years!
Zer-Issar, son of Ahû'a-eriba, ... ;
... , ... , ...
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria: facing (brick) of the well of the temple of the divine Sebetti.
... from the presence of ...
in all, x persons, at the disposal of Kiṣir-... , the merchant.
Witness Šumma-Adad. Witness Ahu-nuri.
NN, son of Hiriṣayu, son of Hiriṣayu, from the town of Ilhini in the district of the city Tušhan; Hiriṣayu, farmer, ... ; 1 son; 1 woman; 10 hectares of arable land in the town of Ilhini in the district of the city Tušhan.
I have received the tribute of the king of Elam: silver, gold, (and) precious stones. I have received the tribute of the king of Babylon: silver, gold, (and) precious stones. I have received the tribute of the sheikhs of Chaldea: silver, gold, (and) precious stones. Now, I am waiting for the king of the land of the Arabs.
Palace of Šamšī-Adad, vice-regent of the god Aššur, builder of the temple ...
Witness Šep-Issar, servant of the governor of Calah.
... he sent ... to Nineveh, before me, to do obeisance, ... , (and) to ask for my lordship. (i 20') He sent ... , his eldest son, ... , with his ... , to do obeisance to me. I made ... an offering of the gods Bēl (Marduk) and Nabû, my lords, ... and I presented (them) with ... of my royal majesty.
to them as ...
I received gold (and) shining silver sling straps as their wrist-trappings (and) slashed off their belts with sharp swords. I took away gold (and) silver (decorated) belt-daggers as their waist-trappings.
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, chariot driver.
... its base is like a ...
The coils of the colon are 16 in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
... the hand of his lord
The former palace, which was 360 cubits long opposite the zamû-wall of the ziggurrat, 80 cubits wide opposite the tower of the temple of the goddess Ištar, 134 cubits wide opposite the tower of the Bīt-Kidmuri, (and) 95 cubits wide opposite the tower of the temple of the god Uraš; which earlier kings, my ancestors, had had constructed for their lordly dwelling, but whose construction they had carried out inexpertly:
... the 'station' ...
The 'station' is present. The 'path' ... The left of the gall bladder is split ...
a cup of quinces;
10 talents 17 minas ...
— Jupiter stood there one month over its period.
... Basunu and his people, ...
The 'path' is present. The 'strength' is absent. The 'well-being' is present. The 'path' on the left of the gall bladder is present. The 'base of the throne' is present. The 'increment' is normal...
... , son of ...
3 ... ;
The bearer of the apsû-stone (symbol) is Marduk, who rises from and goes down to the underworld, because he defeated the Anunnaki, the sons of the god Enlil, and the Sebetti, the sons of the goddess Ninlil, and because he avenged his father, the god Asari.
The 'strength' is present.
I joyfully entered his palace, which is in Babylon, then I opened his treasury and brought out gold, silver, gold (and) silver utensils, precious stones, all kinds of possessions (and) property, a substantial treasure, (together with) his wife, his palace women, courtiers, attendants, all of the craftsmen, as many as there were, (and) his palace attendants, and I counted (them) as booty.
The ... of the house of Aššur have been assigned to him. He says: "... the Puqudu
The corps of the king, my lord, is well.
And as for him, he did not know how to reason with his heart.
The king, my lord, should ask them where they buy these valuables, where they sell them, who receives them from their hands, and who lets them pass (the border). I am now writing to the king, my lord,  (about) a matter which I have observed.
I will do the king's work.
Sanda-uarri, a servant of Sanâ son of Pahî, has come to Birati saying: "The king, my lord, has sent me to you, saying: 'Go and see how the men of Birati are working, and come and tell it to me.' I have gone and seen (for myself): the men of Birati are working hard, and they are making bricks. Now, if the king, my lord, commands, I will come and tell it to the king, my lord."
After the king had retreated from Der, when Nabû-šarru-uṣur came to me, I said to him: "The king is not going to Der; you will go and see him." He went, and when he returned, he told me: "The king has indeed gone to Der." I sent a messenger to the city of Akkad, saying: "The king has gone to Der; you will go and see him!"
Witness Hur-waṣi.
My men who were in the ... of Mannea have been taken prisoner.
... to the king
... they will drag
I settled them in the cities Ḫarrua (and) Ušnanis, (cities) on the seacoast. I placed them under the authority of a eunuch of mine, the governor of the city Naʾiri. I had a stele made, had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over them written on it, and I erected (it) in (that) city.
The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
a basket of (mixed) fruit.
Zizî;
... I wrote
An estate of 1 hectare of land adjoining Mannu-ki-Arbail;
Witness Ahhešu, ditto.
... I ordered him to ... and ... I placed on him ... and the tribute of his father’s house, 10 minas of gold, ... I imposed upon him.
... I have written ...
... his ... ; they are bringing it to him.
... to ...
If Venus becomes visible in Ab (V) at an inappropriate time: there will be rains from the sky and floods from the springs; the harvest of the land will prosper.
of days ...
NN, eunuch of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, has contracted and bought (said property) from Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, for 1/2 mina of silver by the mina of Carchemish. Remanni-Adad has released and given (said property) to NN.
... the fortresses of the king, my lord, are well.
To the king, my lord: your servant Gabbu-ana-Aššur.
Land of the Gurraeans
you will bring forth the captives ...
Witness ... ayu, ditto.
... Aššur-šezibanni
1 seah 1 'litre' of regular offering loaves;
... Aššur and Šamaš shall be his prosecutors.
Nabû-remanni, his two sons, ... his wife, a total of 4;
The woman Ezibtu, his daughter of 4 spans —
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Month Iyyar (II), 5th day, eponym year of Abi-yaqar.
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
A thigh, a shoulder, outer cuts;
Witness Nabû-zeru-lešir.
To the king, my lord: your servant Mannu-ki-Ninua. Good health to the king, my lord! The land of the king my lord is well.
From the beginning you have been my support and shielded my front and rear. You have fallen and died on my behalf; how could I ever forget you? You are my dearest friend; how could I ever be separated from you?
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, (or) changed or altered the proceedings...
... the Itu'eans
... them. They are ...
20 cows of sown land,
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: good for Akkad, bad for Elam and the Westland.
... the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me and I marched to the land ... (5') The land ... , which the father who had engendered me had conquered and ... , I conquered from the city ... to the city ... , (a distance of) fifteen leagues, ... (10') The troops of the city Aššur, my lord, were scattered and ... I reorganized (the administration of) that city (and) placed my official as governor over them.
Now then I am sending to the king, my lord, the ... s of the king, my lord, who ... to the work ...
I have sent you (this) message; do whatever you deem best.
When the earth quaked in the night of the 11th of Tammuz (IV), we did not hear any report about it, and when the day arrived, we did not hear any report either. Now, if it has not been remedied, let the king my lord ask: "Has the earthquake been remedied?"
I have sent a detailed report about the work on the river to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should read it. The ... of the king, my lord, should ask the chief exorcist, Aššur-belu-taqqin: "Is it true that the ... of the king, my lord, has been removed?"
... the king ... his official ...
The king, our lord, knows that we are poor and that our fields and water are far  away. We cannot go there, and the king knows that the men who go there  do not come back.
From Nergal-apil-kumu'a.
I ordered the march to the land Ḫatti. Before my (arrival), Lulî, the king of the city Sidon, fled afar into the midst of the sea and disappeared. The awesome terror of the weapon of the god Aššur, my lord, overwhelmed the cities Great Sidon, Lesser Sidon, (and) Bīt-Zitti, his fortified cities (and) fortresses, and they bowed down to my yoke.
... of Sua
... much ...
I, Aššur-etel-ilāni-mukīn-apli, king of Assyria, son of Ashurbanipal, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, ... , pious prince, who reveres the great gods, the one who is assiduous towards their sanctuaries, the one who (re)constructed the temple of the god Aššur,
... you
owner of the ... being sold.
He said: "Aššur-iddina ...
1 dromedary, ...
As soon as the king, my lord, has gone to the temple of Nabû, I shall send the (barley) of the temple of Nabû to the Inner City.
Witness Issar-taqqinanni.
Nabû-eṭir,
Moreover, I struck with the sword Teušpa, a Cimmerian, a barbarian whose home is remote, together with his entire army, in the territory of the land Ḫubušna, a district in the land Elam. I imposed upon him a heavy tribute of horses as his annual giving.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
... of the people of Assyria to the land of Bit-...
The palace of Tiglath-pileser, king of Assyria: (This is) the audience gift that Abī-baʾal, king of Samsimuruna, presented to me.
I built (and) completed (it) from its foundations to its crenellations. I roofed it with magnificent cedar beams. I fastened bands of silver and bronze on doors of cypress, whose fragrance is sweet, and installed (them) in its gates.
The middle of the 'station' is effaced ...
... ;
... , ... -šarru-iškun
... Ahu-duri
... the 'path' is curled...
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Bīt-Daganna, Joppa, Banayabarqa, (and) Azuru, the cities of Ṣidqâ that had not submitted to me quickly. I approached the city Ekron and I killed the governors (and) nobles who had committed crime(s) and hung their corpses on towers around the city; I counted the citizens who had committed the criminal acts as booty; (and) I commanded that the rest of them, (those) who were not guilty of crimes or wrongdo
Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, has contracted and bought (said property) from Bariki and Abail.
Urdu-Nabû, ... , son of Se'-napišti-ili, ditto.
Property of the god Marduk, owner of the tabriu being sold.
2 sheep, kirrutu-meal;
Witness ... -abu-uṣur, tailor, servant of the city ...
Month Elul (VI), 13th day.
I have now sent two messengers to the king, my lord. One is from Lahiru, the other from Dur-Šarruken. The king, my lord, should summon them.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "The eunuch whom I sent to you has not come back; what is the news about him?"
In the hidden depths of (its) subterranean waters I bonded together, with bitumen, reeds below (and) strong mountain stone above, then I raised a plot of land that was 340 cubits long (and) 289 cubits wide out of the water and converted (it) to dry land. (15) I made the area larger than before, added (it) to the former dimensions of the palace, and raised its superstructure 190 courses of brick high. I made it larger than before, added (it) to the former dimensions of the
To the king, my lord: your servant, Bel-iddina. I pray every day to Aššur, Šamaš, Bel and Nabû for the long life, happiness and good health of the king, my lord.
I have heard that Ahhešaya ... is collecting ... and is saying to the son of Yakin: "The king has given me the order to give (them) to you." The son of Yakin should ask him where the king's seal is.
In the month of Addaru I moved up to the pass of ... and received ... horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, and sheep and goats. All my ... s are with me.
... have been brought in.
Silver, gold, possessions, (and) property of the land of Sumer and Akkad — Karduniaš (Babylonia) — (which) had been carried off seven times by the (foreign) riffraff and the Tebiltu, together with the substantial booty of the land Elam, (85) which I had plundered with the help of the god Aššur, my lord, I gave as gifts to the gods of Assyria, to the gods of Karduniaš (Babylonia), to the gods of the
The money is paid completely. Those fields, houses, gardens and people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
As to the merchants about whom my lord wrote to me, I have not yet heard any report from them. When I have heard more, I shall write to my lord.
... 1/2 'litre';
The front of the atrophied part is effaced. The middle part is effaced.
Witness NN, ... of Calah. Witness NN, ...
Bel-dan,
... you should have sent ...
... to the observation post ...
He brought before me (his) daughter, his own offspring, and the daughters of his brothers to serve as housekeepers. He brought his son, who had never crossed the sea, to do obeisance to me. (iii 35') I received from him his daughter and the daughters of his brothers, together with a large marriage gift. I had mercy on him and (then) I gave (his) son, his offspring, back to him.
From Ašaredu the older.
... the king, our lord, ...
I seized the chariots along with ... (and) the ... of the king of the land Elam and ...
... this signet ring of yours ...
Witness NN.
... the deputy
At that time the palace in the citadel of Nineveh which Ashurnasirpal (II), a king who preceded me, had built, had become dilapidated and old. I cleared away its debris, renewed and restored that palace. I built (it) from top to bottom. I made it larger than before. I built within it a room for my royal statue. I deposited my monumental inscriptions and clay inscriptions.
... the vertebrae are recessed ...
adjoining the field of Šulmu-beli, ...
... ;
An estate of ... adjoining ... , (the estate of) ... , and (the estate of) the citadel gate;
Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, king of kings, lord of lords, ruler of rulers, prince, lord of all, conqueror of the rebellious — those who do not submit to him (and) who are hostile to the god Aššur—, crushers of the lands of the Uqumanu and Papḫu — difficult mountain (regions) —, defeater of the princes of the Qutu as far as the land Meḫru, disperser of the forces of the land of
To the king, my lord: your servant Bel-upahhir. Good health to the king, my lord!
sheep ... ,
... , the one who brings his cult centers to completion, the one who makes enemy land(s) obedient, the one who destroys their settlements, the one who has gathered (to himself all) divine offices of highest rank, the one who has collected (all) leadership positions of highest rank, the one who has taken (for himself all) royal offices of highest rank, the one who has gathered (to himself all) presidential offices of highest rank,
To Aššur-nādin-apli, king of Assyria: your brother:
Witness Šulmu-šarri.
1 bag of sesame; 6 ditto of (mixed) kernels.
5 ... s of ... ,
Witness Tuqunu-ereš, merchant.
I crossed the Euphrates in flood with 123 boats of mine. I captured the cities of Sangara, the Carchemishite. I took to the slopes of the Amanus range, where he (Sangara) had dug a moat. I climbed up the Amanus range, (where) he had planted all his vineyards. I cut down his orchards. I took to the slopes of the Lebanon range, where he had planted all his cedar trees. I cut down his cedar trees. I crossed the Euphrates again
Witness Banî, deputy of the chief physician.
Uppammâ, bodyguard;
Witness Ubru-milki, son of Nabû-nadin-ahi. Witness Nabû-nadin-ahi.
... you
we have ... ed ...
Witness Sin-na'id, ditto.
has given ...
... whether
20 minas, NN, merchant ...
The 'well-being' is present. The 'path' reaches its 'seats.'
... -ili, ditto;
101 cavalrymen, 100 grooms, 30 agalu-donkeys, in all 231 grooms.
a ditto of olives; a basket of (mixed) fruit.
... I wrote
... I shall write to my lord.
... 5 citizens of Babylon
... 'litres' of oil
in all, 2: the 'residences' of the Nabû temple.
... to the king
... my land
I have written ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... the town Riba-Dadi, in all 10 Gurreans
... the houses in the city are exempt
... s of the Elamites ...
... the Babylonians ...
The daughter of Nabû-zēr-kitti-līšir, great granddaughter of Kakkullanu,
Now, if it is acceptable to the king, my lord, I will send the rest of the people of Uruk to the king, my lord, in charge of my messenger.
... &  beer  &  Nabû-ahhe-balliṭ
Moreover, breccia, as much as is needed (for making) burzigallu-bowls, (a stone) that had never been seen before, revealed itself at Kapridargilâ (“Dargilâ Village”).
This (refers to) that Adad thunders when the moon is seen.
Witness Nanî, ditto of Nabû-ašared.
I have sent the letter to my lord as soon as I heard the news.
or a ... , or a ... , or a baker, or a brewer, or a confectioner, or sons of the cupbearers,
total, the clothing ...
... of A...
... what is it that the king, my lord, commands?
The god Aššur, father of the gods, who loves my priestly service, placed in my hands the wild beasts and commanded me to hunt. I killed 300 strong lions from my ... chariot with my wildly vigorous assault with the spear. I killed 200 ostriches like caged birds with the spear. I killed 100 strong bulls from my ... chariot with the spear.
the towns Mari...
Witness Kunaya, eunuch of ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Issar-šumu-ereš. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I took away the kingship of Lulî, the king of the city Sidon. I placed Tu-Baʾlu on his throne and imposed upon him payment (in recognition) of my overlordship.
A tablet of Naṣib-Qata-ṣabat to Nabû-zeru-lešir, his brother. Good health to my brother!
1 ... of gold, 1 ... of silver, 1 ... of bronze, 1 ... of iron: the palace scribe.
Land of the Palil-arrians
2 seahs, the 21st day;
of the palace of the queen.
... has entered there.
The servants of Bel-ahhe-eriba, the son of the šandabakku, who appealed to the king, my lord, saying: "We have been sold for money to ... " — now, these men ... to the merchant NN, the ... of NN, and the ... of NN
(As for) the people of the city Arzâ who had thrown Padî, their king who was bound by treaty and oaths to Assyria, into iron fetters and who had handed him over to Hezekiah of the land Judah in a hostile manner, they became frightened on account of the villainous acts they had committed. They formed a confederation with the kings of Egypt (and) the archers, chariots, (and) horses of the king of the land Meluḫḫa, forces without number, and they came to their aid.
I had a statue of the god Aššur, my lord, made and I set it up in the palace of the city Gaza. The awe-inspiring radiance of (the god) Aššur, my lord, overwhelmed the people of Egypt and the Arabs, and they bowed down to my yoke.
Mušallim-Aššur,
Witness Šamaš-ahu-iddina, physician.
a cup of small onions; a ditto of quinces;
May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! May they grant the king, my lord, happiness and physical well-being!
I have now sealed the chest and am sending it to my lord. My lord should ask the scribe of the palace.
... he will take away
Sam'al
Month Iyyar (II), 15th day, eponym year of Nabû-šarru-uṣur of Marqasa.
As to what you wrote to me: "A messenger of Midas the Phrygian has come to me, bringing me 14 men of Que whom Urik had sent to Urarṭu as an embassy" — this is extremely good! My gods Aššur, Šamaš, Bel and Nabû have now provided for me a second time, (and) this time it is even more excellent than the previous time! What more could I say?
Let the king, my lord, send a sealed order to ... , and let them fetch it and give it to me.
4 basins of silver;
From the lamentation priest Bel-šuma-iškun.
Now that ... to the king ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-reṣuwa. Good health to the king, my lord!
Sin-per'u-ka''in, ... , son of PN, son of NN, son of Šamaš-šumu-ukin, (... ) all (from) the same family, (all) servants of Sennacherib.
before ...
We shall finish the ... before we go (away)."
11 houses ...
the governor of ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "The son of the city-lord of Šabirešu ... "
An estate of 1 hectare of land, a threshing floor, a garden, a well, (and) a grazing land in the village of Dannaya —
an estate of 2 hectares of land, including a meadow and an irrigated field;
what he did ...
Witness Zar-Aššur, son of NN.
... the king sent a bodyguard to us ... , saying: "... to the fort
strong ...
Now, if the vizier, my lord, commands, I will release them, and they will  go to the Palace.
The money is paid completely. That ... is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Aššur, Šamaš, ... , the Lady of Kidmuri, the Lady of Arbela, the great gods who go before you, will hear your prayer. They will accept and listen, and their heart will be appeased.
I sent (word) ...
Witness NN, ditto of Tušhan.
Seal of Sasiya, owner of the ... being sold.
(Palace of) Sennacherib, king of Assyria. Whoever erases my inscribed name (or) places (it) in the service of a god (or another) person, may the deities Aššur, Sîn, (and) Šamaš make his name (and) his seed disappear.
Tab-shar-Sin, his wife, his 3 daughters, a total of 5.
... the temple of Anu
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
You offer cooked meat before Belet-ili, make a flour/incense-offering, pour oil, honey, beer and wine, and sing: “Mighty ... of Apsû, wife of Ea, is strong and descends into the netherworld.”
To the king, our lord: your servants, the mayors and elders of Nineveh. Good health to the king, our lord! May the king, our lord, be well, and may he be in good spirits.
Aššur-rēša-iši, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Mutakkil-Nusku, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Aššur-dān (I) (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of Aššur:
... I ...
... to the exorcist ...
You, the goddess Ištar ...
... The coils of the colon are 14 in number...
The goddess Ištar, the lady of war and battle, who loves my priesthood,
I set Šarru-lū-dāri, son of Rūkibtu, their former king, over the people of the city Ashkelon and imposed upon him the payment of tribute (and) gifts (in recognition) of my overlordship so that he (now) pulls my yoke.
Disregard that the subject of this query, Esarhaddon, king of Assyria ...
At that time the temple of the god Aššur, my lord, which Aššur-nādin-aḫḫē (II), vice-regent of Aššur, my forefather, had previously built — that temple had become dilapidated and I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I completed it from top to bottom and deposited my monumental inscription.
... the office of scribe
A thigh, a shoulder, ribs, leftovers — the high priest.
... the vizier
Total, 1 son of the chief eunuch, of the crown prince.
The commandant of Cutha has seized the household of Aššur-ereš, son of Sin-iddina, and given it to his brother Bel-iddina. Now that the king, my lord, has caught him red-handed, what is to be done?
Witness NN, chief ... of the field.
of ... ya.
... who ... the goddess Ištar ... the goddess Ištar ... the city ... the city ... the cities ... the fortresses ...
... his servant, who ...
... and his people,
Bel-Harran-belu-usur
A hat, a scarf, a bedspread: the Inner City.
Witness Sagibî, ditto.
The gall bladder is flattened. The 'yoke' is present. The 'path' reaches its 'seats.'
x minas of silver of ... , merchant.
Witness Marduk-šallim, chariot driver.
If the moon is surrounded by a black halo: the month holds rain. — It is seen on the 14th day.
In the eponymy of Aššur-daʾʾinanni, son of Tiglath-pileser (I), I marched a second time to the assistance of the city Ashdod. I received the tribute of the kings of Tyre (and) Sidon.
... the town Aššur-le'i
On the day that ... is placed before ... , the ... sets off (and) is seated (on the dais).
... let them speak
If Jupiter becomes visible in the path of the moon: the king of Akkad will die, and there will be hostility in the land.
As to the town where they are encamped, ...
Moreover, (as for) Ṣidqâ, the king of the city Ashkelon who had not bowed down to my yoke, I forcibly removed the gods of his father’s house, himself, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his brothers, (and other) offspring of his father’s house and took him to Assyria.
And as to the news of the city wall of the fort about which my lord wrote to me: "Did they lay hands on it?" — they did not lay hands on it.
The prince who accepts their gifts, the shepherd who  has charge over them, and the herdsman (who properly administers them,  I):
15 ditto black, 15 ditto white,
... I am (now) sending them to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should question them.
We have now sent the letter to the king, our lord. The king, our lord, should call his servant to account.
... to ...
... the city Ḫuzirina, ... , which had rebelled (and) ... , I surrounded (and) conquered. I brought out the auxiliary forces of the Arameans (and) Chaldeans (and) I counted (them) as booty.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Haruranu or Salilanu or their sons or brothers, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Bel-duri and his sons,
Concerning the substitute king ... about whom you wrote to me:
... the river Uqnû, (which flows) from the mountains ...
An estate of 1 hectare 5 decares of land adjoining the king's road, adjoining the field of Aššur-matka-tera, adjoining the field of Marduk-eriba, adjoining the field of Adad-šumu-uṣur, and adjoining the field of Ibašši-ilu —
Witness Qurdi-Aššur, son of Šamaš-ila'i, scribe.
From Nergal-eṭir.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to his servant: "The work on the river is a great burden on me; nobody is helping me" —
The word of the king to the recruitment officers of the magnates: I am well; you may be happy. Take care of yourselves, eat bread and drink beer in safety!
If a planet comes close to Regulus: the son of the king who lives in a city on my border will make a rebellion against his father, but will not seize the throne; some son of the king will come out and seize the throne; he will restore the temples and establish sacrifices of the gods; he will provide jointly for (all) the temples.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
I have not heard ...
Witness Bel-...
Witness Nabû-na'id, eunuch of Nabû-aplu-iddina.
Mitinti of the land Ashkelon neglected the loyalty oath (sworn by) the great gods (and) revolted against me. He (Mitinti) saw the defeat of Raḫiānu (Rezin) and became afraid, ... He fled to the city Ashkelon and took refuge (there). I sent my officials, the governors of the border areas of his land, against him. They captured him alive in the city Ashkelon and brought him to me.
... I/he seized
This (omen) is from the series.
and we have written it down.
(As for) Necho, king of the cities Memphis and Sais, Šarru-lū-dāri, king of the city Pelusium, Pi-šan-Ḫuru, king of the city Natho, Pa-qruru, king of the city (Pi)šaptu, (ii 5') Inaros (Niḫerau), king of the city Athribis, (and) Naḫkê, king of the city Heracleopolis, those kings, governors, (and) officials whom the father who had eng
If at the moon's appearance the right horn becomes long, and the left horn short: the ruler will conquer a land not his own.
Ever since the god Nabû and the goddess Tašmētu bestowed great wisdom on me and named me to the kingship of Assyria, the great gods have constantly guided me in my good deeds and given me a just scepter to rule the people... (and) to organize well the forgotten rites of the cult centers ...
1 prayer bowl ditto;
To the king, my lord: your servant, Nabû-šarru-uṣur, who guards the 'mule house' at Borsippa. Good health to the king, my lord! May the king, my lord, be in very good spirits! My guard, where the king, my lord, appointed me, is well. The king, my lord, can be glad.
Witness NN, commander-of-fifty.
1,000 stalks of vine ... ;
Shamash-ilaya,
This year dates ...
at the disposal of Šulmu-Issar.
10 ditto, hallam;
(As for) Ummanigaš, the king of the land Elam who had seen the rage of the weapon of (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar, he returned from the mountain(s), his place of refuge, and he entered the city Madaktu, which I had destroyed, demolished, (and) plundered by the command of (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar.
The king, my lord, can be glad.
... you did not give
Two homers of wine in the town of Apiku belonging to Remanni-ilu, farmer, and his people.
If there is a 'weapon'-mark in the top of the left surface of the 'finger,' it is the weapon of the prince. The top of the 'finger' is the weapon of the commander-in-chief.
... I made (them) stand (still) in the place where they were made, and (then) I had mercy on them. I did not allow (them) to wander about in the open country (lit. “on the plain”). I made them return to their places.
Witness Šulmu-ahhe, ditto.
Month Shebat (XI), 12th day, eponym year of Sin-šarru-uṣur, treasurer.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
... I shall bring across the thresholds ... which are at the entrance ... and  the thresholds of ... which are at the entrance of ...
... have been receiving
Witness Ṭab-šar-Nabû, scribe.
... of the country ...
... he is ...
If (the moon) wears a crown: the harvest of the land will prosper; the land will live as if in pastures near the city; the king will reach the highest rank.
the town of Tite ...
... have been bought and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments ...
If anyone in the future, at any time, whether the brother of the crown prince or his prefect or any relative of his, or a neighbour or ... , or any human being at all, lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether he says ... or ... , and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Remanni-Adad, his prefect and his neighbour,
Witness Nergal-ahu-uṣur, commander-of-fifty of the ...
of the Itu'eans ...
... house ...
3,000 (homers) wheat, 3 seahs of oil;
The governor knows that ...
... the king, my lord
... of the king ...
1, (governor of) Arrapha;
At that time, the palace complex that earlier kings, my ancestors, had had constructed for their lordly dwelling — that place had become too small for me to have horses show their mettle (and) to train with chariots. I made the people of the lands plundered by my bow take up hoe (and) basket, and they made bricks. I razed that small palace in its entirety, took a large area from the fields for an addition, and added (it) to it (the palace). I raised the terrace with limestone, strong stone from the mountains.
Shep-Shamash,
... -ibni
... I sent (word) to detain them ... until my messenger
10 ...
... of the ... s of Nineveh
I have now written to the Palace. If I have fallen into the king's  hands, I shall die in the palace. If not, I shall die in the reed hut.
The threshing floor, garden and spring are exempt. The house is exempt.
of Hal...
... my ... s from ...
5 sheep, 5 bowls (of wine): palace overseer.
... the lands ... , Mannea, ... , the lands ... , Uišdiš, ... , ... , ... , ... , ... , Urarṭu, ... , ... , ... , (and) ... I annexed to Assyria (and) I placed a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over them.
... to Marduk-apla-iddina
The day that the king, my lord, sent me to the audience of the magnates, I said to them: "The king has sent me to you, so come and enter into my presence!" They refused to come, (so) I took hold of them in my palace.
I have sent the stone thresholds and stone slabs to the king on the river bank, and they are working on them. We shall place them before the middlemost gate.
... which he/they attacked and the Assyrians defeated them. They seized NN and brought him to the land of the Guti, before me.
And after my father had departed, when the Ukkean and the Gurrean came, the king's eunuch ... said to them: "You are to stay here until ... "
... the city of Šadikannu, which is on the border of the land of the Lullumu, between the cities of Tīl-Ašurri and Ḫumutti,
Tomorrow the king will hear (about it), and the king will kill me on account of the fact that I have not consumed ... The king should give orders that they bring me grain and oil, and I will feed my horses from it.
The palace of Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria.
Palace of Ashurbanipal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria.
adjoining the field of NN,
Let the king, my lord, send a ... to ... ; they should bring the horses from the  other side (of the river).
I sent (word) ...
Witness Ninuayu, ...
I sent ...
in all 19 gods of the house of Ninurta.
Witness Aplu-iddina.
a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
For his life and the well-being of his city the great wall of New City which Puzur-Aššur (III), my forefather, had built —
NN, royal bodyguard;
As to the men of the house of Arbailayu,
From Nabû-šuma-iškun.
total, the men from Ṣiṣṣirtu.
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
Witness Šer-barakki, cook.
On my return march, I defeated all together the Tuʾumuna, Riḫiḫu, Yadaqqu, Ubudu, Gibrê, Maliḫu (Malaḫu), Gurumu, Ubulu, Damunu, (15) Gambulu, Ḫindaru, Ruʾuʾa, Puqudu, Ḫamrānu, Ḫagarānu, Nabatu, (and) Liʾtaʾu, insubmissive Arameans. I carried off into Assy
To the king, my lord: your servant, Nabû-šumu-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord. May the gods ... to the king, my lord.
... Aššur-šumu-kīn
May a later prince restore it (and) return my inscribed name to its place. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
Shalmaneser, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil and vice-regent of Aššur; founder of cult centers, builder of Ekur, the desired object of the gods, the shrine of the goddess Ištar, his lady:
... wrote to me
If the Pleiades enter the moon: there will be deaths, and the king of Akkad will lose his throne.
and the dead ...
Witness Azi-da... , ...
Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the chief eunuch, one who had deserved well of my father and begetter, who had led me constantly like a father, installed me safely on the throne of my father and begetter and made the people of Assyria, great and small, keep watch over my kingship during my minority, and respected my royalty.
5 minas of silver, 5 togas, 5 tunics, 1 potful of iced fish, 1 creel of 100 fish, all tribute: the Palace Superintendent;
If you hear any improper, unsuitable or unseemly word concerning the exercise of kingship which is unseemly and evil against Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, either from the mouth of his brothers, his uncles, his cousins, his family (var. his people), members of his father's line; or from the mouth of magnates and governors, or from the mouth of the bearded and the eunuchs, or from the mouth of the scholars or from the mouth of any human being at all, you shall not conceal it but come
The bearer of the tablet of fates of the gods Aššur, Šamaš, Nabû, (and) Marduk, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I), king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also king of the world and king of Assyria.
1 ... for ... ;
in all 6 witnesses from Irbû.
in all, 2 persons, an estate of 10 hectares of land ... , a house, a threshing floor, a garden ... —
The governor opposite me is keeping watch with the deputy (governor) of Raṣappa.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-šar-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord!
The month Marchesvan (VIII) ...
As to ...
I have now sent him to the king, my lord. The king, my lord, should question him.
... who went
He said: "I have seen it. The ...
The people of the country ...
The money is paid completely. That land is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
The temple of the god Nabû, my lord, which previously (other) kings who preceded me had built — (this temple) had become dilapidated and I rebuilt it from top to bottom.
Witness NN, royal bodyguard.
If the king, my lord, commands, I will send them over to the king, my lord.
... the 'base of the throne' is present...
... one ... -man, ...
... as far as the land Ḫarḫar ...
The 'cavity' of the left lung is split...
On the 30th of Elul (VI) we weighed 30 talents of gold and received it.
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-alik-pani. Good health to the king, my lord!
As to what you wrote to me: "May my lord write to the son of Yakin that he should remove the camp from my presence, so that I can come into the presence of my lord!" — send this message to the son of Yakin: "Since you have written to me, I shall write to the son of Yakin that he should remove the camp from your presence, so that you can come into my presence."
2 cuts of shoulders. Of 1 ox: the stomach, the liver,
Month Ab (V), 5th day, eponym year of Atar-ili, governor of Carchemish.
... s of Nabû-ahhe-... , the chief ...
Sennacherib, ... , the father of the father who had engendered me, ... the god Aššur ...
The breast-bone is thick...
Ša-la-ili-mannu, his servant —
... from the day when ...
... to the land Katmuḫu ... the cities ... , Alzu, ... , Sūru, ... , Apqu, ... , Kunuš-kadru, ... , Ḫarḫar, ... , (5) ... , Arbela, ... , (and) the cities ... which are on the other side of the Euphrates River, ... I took in hand for myself.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
3 (cuts of) meat, of 6 (oxen),
Witness Šarru-lu-dari.
In my accession year (and) in my first regnal year, after I nobly ascended the royal throne, with the exalted strength of the god Aššur, my lord, who goes before me, with the firm approval of the god Šamaš, my lord, who goes at my right hand, with the support of the goddess Ištar, my lady, who goes at my left hand, I mustered my chariotry (and) troops. Difficult roads, mighty mountains, the path of the stars, the way of the goddesses, the direct road to the
in the city ...
shall place 10 minas of silver (and) one mina of gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
in all 60 horses and mules, of Banaya, son of Harba... ,  Nabû-ahu-iddina, NN, NN, and NN —
has taken ...
Witness NN, scribe of the crown prince.
To the goddess Bēlat-parṣī, his mistress, has Šamšī-Adad, appointee of the god Enlil, son of Išme-Dagan (II), appointee of the god Enlil, son of Šamšī-Adad (V), (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil, dedicated (this) for his life, the well-being of his seed, (and) the well-being of his land.
... -aplu-iddina is a refugee from Assyria; he has ... ed his ... s and is staying in the district of GN, working on the harvest.
... this ...
NN, 1 ox, 2 sheep,
The gods on the right and left of Aššur:
(As for) the one who destroys an inscribed object bearing my name, (the name of) my father, (and the name of) my grandfather, (or) does not place (it) with an inscribed object bearing his name, may the great gods of heaven and netherworld overthrow his kingship, deprive him of his life, (and) make his name (and) seed disappear from the land.
... to the ...
Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver of the king, has contracted and bought them from Balaṭu-ereš for x minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
2 minas of silver, of the meal ... ;
I said: "... you ... , why ... ?
of the fort ...
17 ditto of garlic;
Witness Tabalayu, ša šēpi guard.
I conquered the people of the land Muṣri, a dangerous enemy who since time immemorial had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors, and who had constantly plundered the land Yamutbal. With the support of (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar, my lords, I conquered (and) plundered the city Arinu, (their) royal city.
The front of the base-board, nailed.
... in his ... ; if he goes, will he ... ?
(As to) what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "The men and horses should come with you" — hitherto the captives
To the king, my lord: your servant Šarru-emuranni. May Bel and Nabû be concerned with the health of the king, my lord.
I brought out Padî, their king, from the city Jerusalem and placed (him) on the lordly throne over them, then I imposed upon him payment (in recognition) of my overlordship.
Aḫšēri heard about the advance of my expeditionary force and abandoned the city Izirtu, his royal city. He fled to the city Atrāna, a city upon which he relied, (and) took refuge (there). I surrounded the cities Izirtu, Urmēte, (and) Uzbia, his fortified cities, (and) (10') besieged (them). I confined the people living in those cities and (thus) constricted (and) cut short their lives...
The god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises.
... I have written ...
... 1 ...
... your ...
I, Aššur-etel-ilāni, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Ashurbanipal, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Esarhaddon, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Sennacherib, (who was) also vice-regent of the god Aššur; the one who (re)constructed the temple of the god Aššur, (re)built Esagil and Babylon, restored the rites, (and) who
... ;
The women of Puṭi-mati ...
... and you ...
Witness Šer-abu-uṣur, scribe.
... the base of the middle 'finger' of the lung ...
Witness Addî.
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, then I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, fortified cities, together with the small(er) settlements in their environs (and) the district of the land Bīt-Barrû in its entirety, and I added (this area)
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "In the month of Adar (XII) ... , when the gods go to the temple of DN, there is a ritual to perform. Let it be performed" — it has been performed. The king, my lord, may (now) do as he deems best.
Saturn (is equivalent to) the moon; it is favorable for (re)settling.
If a planet is red: the enemy's land will be dispersed.
(As for) Nergal-šarru-uṣur, son of Išpakāia, a citizen of the city Tarbiṣu who had sinned against my treaty (and) cast off the yoke of my lordship, (vii 1) he suffered from dropsy, (that is) “full water.” He fled alone to the land Guzummānu and entered the swamps and marshes. The people of the city Tarbiṣu seized him and brought him to me.
... red, ... ;
The god has set out in procession to the Akitu House.
The vertebrae are recessed. First extispicy...
... I brought back the gods who helped me, together with the booty of the land Elam, and I set up (them) in their (proper) place(s). I made (the city) Dēr, the city of the god Anum, great again, (re)built its shrines, (and) made (them) shine like the sun. I placed a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over them.
I have ... ed against you ...
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
The king knows that I have no grain stores. Where would I store (it)? Under your protection, I have now opened a store in Nineveh and am sending (grain) from it to the king, my lord.
Witness ... -le'i, ...
The king, my lord, can be glad.
to our rear ...
Because of the evil deeds which he had committed against the father who had engendered me, (and because) he had not respected my friendship, in the month Simānu (III), the month of the father who had engendered me, (on) the twelfth day, (the day of) the evening meal of the god Marduk — the great lord, the god who created me — I set out from the city Susa to the city Ḫidalu, (a journey of) one stage (of) the road to Babylon, a journey of one league (and)
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-rehtu-uṣur. May  Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
At that time, in the reign of a previous king, the temple of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, which is inside Nineveh, (that temple) which a prince who preceded me had built, had become dilapidated and I rebuilt it from top to bottom. I completed (it and) decorated (it) more splendidly than ever before. I inscribed my stele (and) deposited (it) therein.
Ashurnasirpal, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (II), (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil and vice-regent of Aššur:
and ...
What is it that the king, my lord, commands?
To the king, my lord: your servant Balasî. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Witness Nabû-eriba, deputy.
Witness Handu, tailor.
4 ... s of ... ;
in all, 1 ditto,
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Šamaš-šallimanni.
I settled them in the city Tīl-karme of the land Gurgum. I set a eunuch of mine over them and imposed upon them (the same) tribute, payment(s), labor duty, (and) military service as the cities Ḫardišpu (and) Bīt-Kubatti.
Seal of Adad-ahu-iddina, owner of the people being sold.
He shall place x minas of silver and one mina of gold in the lap of DN residing in ... , and shall return the money tenfold to its owner.
I said: "... "
the ... :
A tablet of Auriga to the palace scribe. Good health to my lord!
The ... which ... ed ... , saying: "... to ... and to ... ; if not, ... will die."
... Mannu-ki-...
The king ... , who is now ill, and on whom the 'hand' of Nanaya of Uruk is being placed in extispicy — he should not go out into the street until the day I arrive.
What the king, my lord, ordered me concerning the ... s and the ... s of the ... s, saying: "Let them go with you" — they have gone with me. Should the ... s of the ... s of the city of ... also go with me? If not, let the king, my lord, write me what the king commands.
Remanni-Adad, chief chariot driver of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, has contracted and bought (said property) from these gentlemen for 8 minas of silver by the mina of Carchemish.
I have seized the son of Daltâ of (Bit-)Hamban, the scribe of the household of Aššur-reṣuwa, and am herewith sending him to the king, my lord.
... of my lord ...
Let me hear the well-being of the king, my lord, and let me be happy! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
From the city of Lahiru as far as the city of Arrapḫa, x leagues x stretches x rods from Lahiru as far as the city of Arrapḫa. From the city of Arrapḫa as far as the city of Kurbail, x stretches x rods from Arrapḫa as far as the city of Kurbail.
Isana
(As for) Aḫšēri, who did not fear my lordly majesty, (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar placed him in the hands of his servants. The people of his land incited a rebellion against him (and) they cast his corpse into a street of his city. They dragged his body to and fro and cut off his head.
... the king, my lord
If the rising of Enmešarra is very red: it will increase the floods.
If Venus becomes visible in Sivan (III): the king of the land will fall.
Total, 7, of Adad-...
in all, 6 women.
... the king, my lord, can be glad.
of the king from ...
... I shall not give it to you
Witness Mar-... , mayor of Calah.
to ...
... went
You (are the one) who placed the foundations of their greatness, you made their foundations as firm as the heavens. You raised them up, you made them pre-eminent, you made them great, you made them magnificent, you made them splendid, you made them perfect, you made them beautiful, you made them great, you made them magnificent, you made them pre-eminent, you made them ... , you made them glorious, you made them victorious, you made them superior, you made them magnificent, you made them splendid, you made them beautiful, you made them
I had a stele made, had all the victorious conquests that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, written on it, and I erected (it) on the plain of the city Ḫalulê.
... the whole fish
The 'well-being' is overturned ...
NN and his people, Iglî and his people,
The house of the palace herald has ... ed the ... of the king, my lord, and sent (them) to me.
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial payment from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
... jar of wine ...
In lieu of his fine, he has handed over to his son.
... s of ... of the ... s
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "May Bel and Nabû grant you success! Let your guard be strong!" — Bel and Nabû have indeed granted me success. The king, my lord, knows that I am one who reveres the gods and that I have always been one who keeps the watch of the king, my lord. From the moment the king, my lord, appointed me, until now, there has been no other prefect or commander-of-fifty in my presence. I have always been one who reveres the king and the house of my lords. The
... I have not sent ...
sent ...
... I ordered the march to the land Ḫatti. I crossed the Euphrates in flood (and) made my way to the city Carchemish of the land Ḫatti. I received tribute from Sangara, the Carchemishite: silver, gold, tin, bronze, bronze casseroles, the staffs of the king's hand, a gold bowl, a gold tureen, gold vessels, gold pails, (and) bronze ... I took with me the chariots, cavalry, (and) infantry of the god Aššur
... about whom the king, my lord, wrote to his servant: "The servants of the king, my lord, who went to the house of Šarru-lu-dari and seized him — they should have come to me first! If they had come to me first, I would have given the house of Šarru-lu-dari to them! Now they have given it to NN. You should not be happy, and you should not ... !"
If the Yoke star is low and dark when it comes out: the ruler will become furious and will lead his troops into battle.
of Pašî ...
I dismantled the outposts that I had constructed against Baʾalu, the king of the land Tyre. By sea and dry land, I opened (all of) his routes, as many as I had seized. I received from him his substantial payment. I turned around (lit. “I turned the front of my yoke”) and returned safely to Nineveh, my capital city.
Witness Ṣil-Aya, cohort commander.
... the name of the great lord Marduk ...
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me, I went and asked the merchant ... ; he said: "I have not sold any ... "
10 ditto, hallam;
Witness Šep-Aššur, ...
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord.
Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, who has now written whatever he wishes in this papyrus and placed it before your great divinity, and (whom) your great divinity knows —
2 (of) "If a City is Set on a Hill,"
... ;
(As for) Uppis, chieftain of the city Partakka, Zanasana, chieftain of the city Partukka, (and) Ramateia, chieftain of the city Urakazabarna, (vi 10') Medes whose country is remote (and) who had not crossed the boundary of Assyria nor trodden on its soil in the time of the kings, my ancestors —
Witness Šep-ahhe.
... the exorcist, the physician, the auger, the ... , the carpenter, the smith, the goldsmith, the coppersmith, the ... , the weaver, the ... , the boatman, the reed-worker, the ... , the ... , the wainwright, the bricklayer, the ... , the carpenter, the smith, the goldsmith, the coppersmith, the ... , the weaver, the ... , the boatman, the reed-worker, the ... , the ... , the exorcist, the physician,
I ordered the march to the city Madaktu, his royal city. In the month Tebētu (X), bitter cold set in and continuous rain fell, and I was afraid of the snow in the gorges, the outflows of the mountains, (so) I turned around and took the road to Assyria.
Concerning the ... about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Has it been sent to you by the hands of Šulmu-beli-lašme?" — it has not been sent to me by the hands of anyone.
... the heart ...
Witness Nabû-tabni-uṣur.
(As for) the land Patušarri, a district in the area of the salt desert, which is in the midst of the land of the distant Medes, borders Mount Bikni, the lapis lazuli mountain, (iii 35) (and) upon the soil of whose land none of the kings, my ancestors, had walked — I carried off to Assyria Šidir-parna (and) E-parna, mighty chieftains, who were not submissive to (my) yoke, together with their people, their riding horses, oxen
1 bow-case of boxwood, polished:
... the Urarṭian(s) ...
After the letter which you sent I am sending to you Bel-eṭir and Arbayu, the cohort commander, with the horses, to stay and work with you. As soon as they have helped you, I shall send the royal bodyguard Adad-šallim to you. Stay and work with him until I send you the king's troops.
... the dead ones
The god Aššur, the great mountain, granted to me unrivalled sovereignty and made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises. He made all of the black-headed (people) from the Upper Sea of the Setting Sun to the Lower Sea of the Rising Sun bow down at my feet. (i 15) Thus did recalcitrant rulers come to fear battle with me. While they were abandoning their settlements, they flew away alone like bats (living) in crevices to inaccessible place(
... of the king of Elam
Does your great divinity know it? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Disregard the (formulation) of the prayer for today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-belu-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord! The city of Der and the fort are well.
he ...
total ...
The sons of the king have been taught (a lesson), and they will (now)  do the work.
... will they attack, kill, plunder (and) loot (them)? Will Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, be troubled and angry?
... and
I have written to you; don't be negligent but keep watch over the trees and over the saplings until I send you further instructions.
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Witness Nabû-abu-uṣur, ...
Witness Silim-ili.
the town of Sari... ,
... , ... , ... ,
NN, servant of ...
... of the town Šadikannu
... the road of ...
... their ... s
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), capable shepherd, favorite of the great gods, guardian of truth who loves justice, renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the insubmissive, (and) the one who strikes enemies with lightning:
... I sent him ... ; now he has not come.
(As for) the rest of the Arabs who had fled from (my) weapons, the heroic god Erra struck (them) down. Famine broke out among them and they ate the flesh of their children on account of their hunger. The deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Adad, and Ištar, my lords, decreed curses, as many as were written in their treaties, accordingly upon them. The great gods, my lords, overthrew their sovereignties and they (the Arabs) bowed down to my y
The gods of the House of Aššur.
As he was walking with me, he said to me: "You are an expert in divination? Tell me, why have you not told me the truth? If you have something to say, speak out!" I said to him: "I am not an expert in divination. The king knows that I have studied under the aegis of the king, my lord, (but) I have not mastered (the art)."
If a planet in ... moves ... : the days of the ruler will be long.
250 archers,
20 minas of black wool;
... says: "I am a citizen of Babylon. What is it that the king commands?"
Witness ... -zeri, ditto.
1 seah 1 'litre' of regular offering loaves;
The mother of the king is doing very well; the king, my lord, can be happy.
I brought back all together the chariots along with their horses, whose drivers had been killed in the thick of (that) mighty battle and which had themselves been released so that they galloped about on their own. When the second double-hour of the night had passed, I stopped their slaughter.
4 ... ;
... the palace supervisor of ... ; they went and attacked the men of Laqû, the herald ...
The king, my lord, knows that my brother is in the service of Marduk-šarru-uṣur.
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-šumu-ukin. The very best of health to the king, my lord!
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, (or) changed or altered the proceedings...
a ditto of small onions;
... his ... s
Moreover, as for him, the terrifying splendor of (the god) Aššur, my lord overwhelmed him and he passed away.
To the king, my lord: your servant Marduk-šarru-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord!
We set out on the 29th and are coming now. May Nabû bless the king, my lord!
... , ... -zeru-...
5 ditto — Il-hari
I myself prayed to the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl, Nabû, Nergal, Ištar of Nineveh, (and) Ištar of Arbela, the gods who support me, for victory over (my) strong enemy and they immediately heeded my prayers (and) came to my aid.
... I have sent ... to the king, my lord; they will return ... to the king, my lord.
If on the 14th day the moon and sun are seen together: reliable speech; the land will become happy; the gods will remember Akkad favorably.
I brought back all together the scattered people of Assyria, who had been distributed among the (foreign) riffraff and had become slaves, and I restored them to their former status. I made it clear to them (the Assyrians) that they (the gods) had remembered their covenant with their (the Assyrians’) ancestors.
... s to
they will raise ...
they are plotting ...
... lambs and ...
Witness Ahabû. Witness Sin-zeru-ibni.
From Dur-Šarruken as far as the ... of the Euphrates River (and) from the Euphrates River as far as the land Suhu, x leagues x stretches x rods.
The palace of Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (I), king of Assyria: (brick) belonging to the courtyard of the goddess Ištar.
If there is (even) one single person left in the whole country whom the king, my lord, has left in my care, I swear by Bel and Zarpanitu that I shall not let a (single) person slip from the hands of my grasp until I have sent a detailed report to the king, my lord.
1 goose, 1 duck, 10 turtledoves.
To the king, my lord: your servant Akkullanu. Good health to the king,  my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
From Nabû-šuma-iškun.
Palace of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria.
Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
I have given them (the following) order: "Guard the fort!"
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also strong king, king of the world, (and) king of Assyria; valiant man who acts with the support of Aššur, his lord, and has no rival among the princes of the four quarters, marvelous shepherd, fearless in battle, might
The maidservant of the governor of Arbela, the woman Ululayu, and the woman ... aya, a total of three persons belonging to Remanni-Adad, chariot driver, have appealed to the king, my lord, saying:
Witness Bel-...
I performed an extispicy...
The royal bodyguard Aššur-šallim-ahhe came to me in the  presence of the son of Aššur-zeru-ibni, and I said to him: "Who is the man  who gave you the order to seize him? The king has given me orders about him."  He said: "The king gave me the order (personally)." I said: "The king has  not given you the order; who is the man who gave you the order?" He said:  "The royal bodyguard Aššur-šallim-ahhe
God Aššur, great lord, ... ; god Anu, ... ; god Enlil, ... ; god Ea, ... ; god Sîn, king of the lunar disk, lord of brilliance; god Adad, the exceptionally strong, lord of abundance; god Šamaš, judge of heaven and underworld, commander of all; god Marduk, sage of the gods, lord of omens; god Ninurta, warrior of the Igīgū and Anunnakū gods; god Nergal, perfect one, king of battle; god Nusku,
The one who has gathered to himself (all) rites and ordinances, who has collected (all) ancient and modern ordinances, who has gathered to himself (all) rites of the purification rites of the past and present, who has gathered to himself (all) purification rites of the present day, who has gathered to himself (all) initiation rites, who has gathered to himself (all) exorcistic lore, who has gathered to himself (all) medical recipes, who has gathered to himself (all) alchemistic lore, who has gathered to himself (all)
From Nabû'a of Assur.
... Nergal-naṣir
Witness ... -šarru-ibni, eunuch.
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "Why did you not write to me (earlier)?" I sent my messenger to the Palace. Now I have sent him to the king, my lord.
Nabû-le'i, ... , son of Sin-na'id, 3 persons;
Nabû-naṣir, staff-bearer;
total, the men from ...
If an anomaly is male and female: omen of Ku-Baba who ruled the land; the land of the king will go to ruin; the king of the land will fall in battle.
There is a hole in the left of the gall bladder. The top of the breast-bone is split.
... your ...
Witness Zarutî, scribe.
Witness Ahu-illika, chief of the reed-workers.
the deportees ...
Let the king, my lord, write to his servant that I should give them straw, and I will give it to them.
Sukkaya,
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
(As for) the people who had conspired with NN, the governor of the land Gambulu, (and) with Natnu, the king of the land of the Nabayateans, (vii 10') or with any enemy, and (who) had plotted evil (deeds) against Ashurbanipal, the king of Assyria, and the king's family, (and) had said to one another: "Let us put our trust in the land Gambulu (and) the king of the land of the Nabayateans" — (
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one who fashioned image(s) of (the god) Aššur and the great gods, I: With limestone, stone from the mountains, I raised this akītu-house as high as a mountain, from its foundations to its crenellations.
the stomachs, livers, kidneys, hearts.
The king, my lord, can be glad.
Sheep of Aššur-ahhe-balliṭ, at his disposal.
The king of Elam heard about the capture of his cities and fear fell upon him. He brought (the people of) the rest of his cities into fortresses. He abandoned the city Madaktu, his royal city, and set out for the city Ḫaydala, which is in the mountains.
... my messenger
As to the Hatalleans ... , the ... s (and) the ... s about whom the king, my lord, wrote me,
To the king of the lands, my lord: your servant NN. May DNN bless the king, my lord!
This (omen) is from before Aššur.
Now I have written to open your ears; be very attentive until I have more time.
(As for) the exalted chariot, the vehicle of the god Marduk, the pre-eminent one among the gods, the lord of lords, I completed its feature(s) with gold, silver, (and) precious stones. I gave (it) as a gift to the god Marduk, the king of the totality of heaven and netherworld, the one who overwhelms my enemies.
adjoining the house of Marduk-ereš,
The judgement which the king imposed upon me:
(Property) of Rīmūt-ilī, son of Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria.
(When) I heard ... , I wrote to the king, my lord.
The king, my lord, knows that I myself am taking care of the pack animals of the Inner City. Those of Halahhu are under the command of the commander-in-chief. There are no pack animals in my charge at all.
10 shoots (of sesame);
He has seized the house of his lords and turned it into a storehouse. He has removed my inscription and my name and written his (own) name.
From Ašaredu.
As long as the son of Yakin is alive, the king, my lord, should not send him to the Sealand. If the king, my lord, (nevertheless) orders: "Send him to the Sealand," the king, my lord, should at the same time send to the Sealand two servants of the king, my lord, who are in his entourage, so that they may keep watch over him and bring him back (if necessary).
The king knows that all the talk which they talk among the lamentation priests and the whole country is but a big lie. They speak only to ... and to themselves.
14 tablets, one leather ... ,
20 cavalry mounts from the (governor) of Bet-Adini;
A flock of sheep belonging to the chief cook, at the disposal of Sin-na'id, prefect of the staff-bearers.
When the sun rises in the morning,
... , ... , ... , NN, ... , NN, ...
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, pious prince, humble, the one who reveres the great gods, the one who is assiduous towards the sanctuaries of the great gods, the one who (re)constructed the temple of the god Aššur, (re)built Esagil and Babylon, renovated Eanna, completed the sanctuaries of all of the cult centers, (and) constantly established appropriate procedures in them; son of Sennacher
(Guaranteed against) seizures of epilepsy for 100 days (and against) fraud forever.
Witness Nabû-ahhe-iddina, baker.
He seats the chanters and goes to the palace.
I have now written to the commander-in-chief; let the king, my lord, do as he deems best. I have ... ed the ... of the king, my lord, and ... ed the ... of the king, my lord.
The god Ninurta, the son of the god Enlil, the one who loves my priestly service, gave to me the wild beasts and commanded me to hunt. I killed 300 strong lions from my ... chariot with my wildly vigorous assault with the spear. I killed 200 wild bulls with my lordly assault with the spear. I killed 100 ostriches like caged birds with the spear.
the forts ...
... the Ruqahu tribe
Witness Didî.
2 (of) Izbu,
The 26th day: at court, favorable.
A bowl of haršu (and mixed) fruit. A flagon of Carchemish budê-confection.
... who is in his presence, who is not loyal ...
the governor of Calah and ...
Qarhâ, son of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), king of Chaldea.
I have one ... ; I have one ... ; one ... for one ...
Witness Puṭi-ahu.
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), capable shepherd, favorite of the great gods, guardian of truth who loves justice, renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the insubmissive, (and) the one who strikes enemies with lightning:
... he will do in my country what is not good to me and to my country.
The bread of the temple is excellent. The guard of the temple is well. The king, my lord, can be glad.
1 of Haršean type,
Witness Mušezib-Aššur, ...
... his messenger
... by the command of the god Šamaš
Witness Se'-ila'i, ditto.
Palace of Sargon (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods.
News of the son of Yakin: he has crossed the river Tharthar ...
... set ...
... the king, my lord, knows that all the chariot-poles of our cavalry are broken. The king, my lord, should issue an order to Urad-Gula that he give us new ones, or else we shall seize a pole from a (royal) guard and break it.
... Šumu-lešir, the son of the rab mūgi
Under the protection of Aššur, my lord, I marched to the land Katmuḫu. I conquered from the city Tīl-Garimme, which is on the border of the land Tabal, as far as the city Kubanaše, which is on the shore of the Great Sea. I crossed over the River Ḫabur. I conquered from the city Ḫarḫar as far as the city Ḫalḫalauš, the fortified cities of the land Katmuḫu. I took hostages from them (
... I have settled them in the district
... the commander-of-fifty of the palace ...
The bakers take 2 litres of beer and 2 litres of hinhinu-flour for the offering of the king. The brewers take 2 litres of beer for the offering of the king. Total: 4 litres of beer for the offering of the king.
... to the citizens of Babylon whom I have not ... to Assyria. I have sent ... to the citizens of Babylon (only) as a message of goodwill; they have not gone there.
... before ...
... their men
You shall not make common cause with (any)one who may revolt against Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, concerning whom he has concluded (this) treaty with you, but, should they seize you by force, you shall flee and come to Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate. (10) Should he, for his part, abandon you, you shall protect him in country and in town, fall and die for him. You shall not hand him over to his enemies
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me:
... Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, who is now intent on sending ... where you are going to be,
Yatamâ, archer, has contracted and bought them from Babilayu,  from Ahu'a-...
... s to ...
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments...
Witness Aplu-uṣur.
Ila'i-iababa, farmer, and his people; ... ; ... -Issar, farmer, and his people;
Month Adar (XII), 12th day, eponym year of Šulmu-beli-lašme (670 B.C.).
they killed him ...
... The middle of the base-board is effaced. The breast-bone ...
The lady Nanaya-šarrat, my sister, is in the presence of my brother.
... I rebuilt and completed. I made its structure larger than the one in the days of the past. I built (and) completed (it) from its foundation(s) to its crenellations. Inside (it), I built Emelamana, the temple of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, ...
in the city of Arbela ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean, (or) has altered or changed the proceedings...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šarru-emuranni. Good health to the king, my lord!
From Nergal-eṭir.
... I am a servant who
A tuft of red wool;
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Ashur-belu-usur,
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Ṣabu-damqu or his sons or his grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Mušallim-Issar, his sons and his grandsons,
Month Iyyar (II), 28th day, eponym year of Aššur-naṣir.
3 ditto, ditto, the front red, of the port, ... ;
Witness Inurta-isse'a.
20 turtledoves, served hot;
... the fumigants
If the day reaches its normal length: a reign of long days.
... the forts ...
... the xth day;
As to what you wrote to me: "I have been told that the son of Yakin has arrived. Let him be told that my messenger is on his way" —
Concerning the work on the river, Ummanigaš (and) his brothers said to me: "We will give you the men, and you will give us the material (to use) in the work." I said to them: "I will give you the material, and you will give me the men." They said: "We will give you the men, and you will give us the material."
They said: "We shall not go (there) unless the king sends us (there)." Now the king has sent (them) to me. Should they come?
I shall bring the ploughs and oxen together and cultivate seed as much as possible. By the god of my father and my grandfather, I will do whatever is pleasing to the king.
Bel-aplu-iddina, son of Babilayu, servant of Nabû-šarru-uṣur.
This is from the 'party' of the 'house.'
... very
If a planet ... in the sky: ... will die.
The 5th day ...
NN, bodyguard of the queen mother;
... as follows:
who ... to the presence
The king, my lord, knows that my horses ... in the centre of Nineveh.
Witness Nabû-šallim, overseer of the household of the governor.
Son of Iqīša-Marduk, ditto (governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari), descendant of Adad-nādin-zēri, ditto (governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari), one of an enduring lineage,
Witness Habasti, chariot driver ...
Total, of Adad-remanni, the cohort commander.
The 'well-being' is raised.
... as ...
... or the ...
In the future, may a later prince, when that temple becomes dilapidated and he restores (it), restore my inscribed name to its place. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers. May he return my clay cone to its place.
Month of Shebat (XI), 8th day, eponym year of Bel-Harran-šadu'a (650).
To the king, my lord: your servant PN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Bel and Nabû bless the king, my lord!
temple of ... and ...
I, Šamaš-bēla-uṣur, governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, ... who loves justice, ... the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me and I sent (my) officials, the ... of my father, to collect the sown seed of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari.
... Aššur-šarru-...
Yata', son of NN, the scribe of the chief cupbearer, has contracted and bought him from Dannaya for x minas of silver.
NN, farmer, and his people.
Marduk-šumu-uṣur, Naṣiru, Tabnî,
Son of Nabû-apla-iddina, king of Babylon, descendant of NN, the šandabakku (governor of Nippur), one of an enduring lineage,
the overseer of their ... s
Abu-ila'i;
... to the presence
The money is paid completely. That ... is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
I, Ninurta-kudurrī-uṣur, governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, the chosen one, whom the deities Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Nabû, (and) Marduk, the gods who support me, ... in the month Ulūlu ... the month ...
... if he, having planned, sends him, and he sets up camp against the city ... , will he ... ?
they are ...
As to the news of Bel-iqiša, the messenger of the king, my lord, who went to the son of Yakin: "The king has sent me to you; why do you not send me a reply?"
Concerning the troops about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me, I shall  send them to the king, my lord, as soon as they have entered my presence.
If the moon becomes visible in Tebet (X) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour Subartu; a foreigner will rule the Westland.
... with Urda-...
They are free from quay and crossing dues;
When the god Šamaš, the great lord, came to my side and I killed the Subarean (Assyrian) and turned the land of my enemy into a mound of ruins (lit. “a mound and ruins”), at that time, (with regard to) the armory, which is in Kalḫu, that Shalmaneser (III), son of Ashurnasirpal (II), a ruler who came before me, had built, (and) which had become old, I removed its dilapidated section(s) by the command of the god
... I shall set out ...
... ditto, white;
2 talents, the men from Nineveh.
4 minas of silver, capital, belonging to Marduk-aplu-iddina, at the disposal of Dadî, son of Ilu-pija-uṣur, from Bit-Zamani.
If a fog rolls in Shebat (XI): eclipse of the Kassites.
Seal of Šamaš-... ,
Whoever seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Šumma-ilani, his sons (or) his grandsons ...
writing-board ...
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Nabû-eriba or his governor, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Šumma-ilani, shall pay 10 minas of silver.
Ilu-tapputi ...
Witness (blank).
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me, it was indeed the third year (since) the king, my lord, appointed me in this position. (Yet) in this very way a predecessor of mine was dismissed and a present of his own making has been put in his place! Is it (really) a matter of three years?
Will they, be it by means of war, or by force, or by means of ... , or by means of ramps, or by means of battering rams, or by means of famine, or by means of hunger, or through friendliness and peaceful negotiations, or through any ruse of capturing a city,
Now then I am sending him to the vizier, my lord.
Concerning ... about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "...
On my second campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me and I marched to the land of the Kassites and the land of the Yasubigallians, who since time immemorial had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors. In the high mountains, difficult terrain, I rode on horseback and had my personal chariot carried on (men’s) necks. In very rugged terrain I roamed about on foot like a wild bull.
May the king of all lands be everlasting!
I put to the sword the population of the city Ḫirimmu, a dangerous enemy, and I did not spare a single one. I hung their corpses on poles and placed (them) around the city. I reorganized that district (and) imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the gods of Assyria, my lords.
of Assyria ...
The king should ask the chief scribe; if it is acceptable to the king, let the king command that a seal (should be placed) on the (royal) signet ring.
Witness Barruqu, ditto.
and ...
... he is
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
... they are killing
... the 'third man' of the right
an estate of 40 (hectares) of sown land
The 17th day: convert the cleaned (barley).
8 females, 5 maids,
... is well.
... of the king will be placed in the mouth of a lion.
Šumma-ilu, ... ;
8 (cuts of) meat ... ;
Witness Sukkaya.
... the king, my lord, ...
Witness Aššur-šumu-uṣur.
... I marched to the land Ulluba... the land Ulluba, (which is) above the land Mannea, ... the people of the land Ulluba, who had not bowed down to the yoke of my lordship, (iii 5') took fright in the face of the brilliance of Aššur and my mighty weapons, and bowed down to my yoke. I imposed upon them tribute and impost. They sent to Nineveh, my capital city, their daughter with a substantial dowry, together with a large marriage gift, to serve as a housekeeper
to ...
If at the moon's appearance its right horn becomes long, and its left horn short: the king will conquer a land not his own.
... of the house of NN
Tabni-aplu-iddina, son of Ba... , ...
the town of Nunak, as far as ...
... all ...
An estate of 2 decares of throne land, adjoining the king's road and the threshing floor of the domestics —
Later on, I shall write to my lord how the situation is.
Moreover, (as for) Ṣidqâ, the king of the city Ashkelon who had not bowed down to my yoke, I forcibly removed the gods of his father’s house, himself, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his brothers, (and other) offspring of his father’s house (iii 30) and took him to Assyria. I set a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over the city Ashkelon and (thereby) made him bow down to my yoke.
Why ... ? Let the king, my lord, send (word) to ... me ...
From Balasî.
an estate of 2 hectares 4 decares belonging to Mannu-ki-Adad, from the city of Kar-Tukulti-Ninurta to the city of Arbela, (adjoining) the field of Ubru-Nabû, the field of Abi-ṭaba, and the field of Arbailayu;
I have sent (word) to the palace. If the king commands, I shall send the sash of the temple steward to be placed on top of it.
... a bowl of habbur (wine)
... which the Itu'eans had taken away in the time of my father and the king, my lord, (and) which the Akkadians had recovered from the hands of the Itu'eans, I myself now took away from the Akkadians. The Itu'eans, who had helped the Akkadians, came to me and grasped my feet. I made them swear an oath by the great gods and (then) I gave the house of their lords back to them.
May Palil, the lord of the desert, who dwells in the city Nineveh, by his weapon deliver him into the hands of the king, my lord.
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, wise prince, circumspect ruler, shepherd of the people, (and) leader of a widespread population, I:
The lady ...
The king who makes the foundation of the temple firm, the one who completes the sanctuaries, the one who makes enemy land(s) obedient, the one who destroys their settlements, the one who has gathered (to himself all) divine offices, the one who makes the cult centers shine, the one who makes abundant the offerings, the one who provides for the sanctuaries, the one who makes the cult centers shine:
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhe.
... the son of the king ...
Adad-nerari (III), overseer, son of Šamši-Adad (V), overseer, son of Shalmaneser (III), likewise overseer.
As for Min(u)ḫimmu of the city Samsimuruna, Tu-Baʾlu of the city Sidon, Abdi-Liʾti of the city Arwad, Ūru-Milki of the city Byblos, Mitinti of the city Ashdod, (ii 5') Būdi-il of the land Bīt-Ammon, Kammūsu-nadbi of the land Moab, Aya-rāmu of the land Edom, all of the kings of the land Amurru, they brought extensive gifts,
... Witness Mar-...
Witness Ša-la-mašê, priest of Nabû.
The palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, son of Shalmaneser (I), king of the universe, son of Adad-nārārī (I) (who was) also king of the universe; property of the palace.
... and when ...
... the land of the king, my lord, is well; the king, my lord, can be glad.
... your ... s
I am ... ing my work.
(As to) the stored grain of the Nabateans of which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why have you not sent me any (of it)?" — now then I am sending it to the king, my lord.
Ninurta-kudurrī-uṣur, ... of the city of Ṣirina, has contracted and bought it for 2 minas of gold from Zabinu.
I worked on the dead ones until I wore out (my) clothing. I made bricks with my (own) pure hands (and) made the dead ones lie flat. I finished the work on the dead ones which ... had not finished. I made bricks in my (own) pure hands and raised the terrace. I made the dead ones lie flat on the terrace.
An estate of x hectares of land adjoining the field of ... and the field of ...
In the eponymy of Aššur-...
If the moon at its appearance ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... your ... s
Witness Zar-Issar.
in accordance with the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord, and your favorable decisions, should the subject of this query, Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, strive and plan, and send the troops and horses which are written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to where he wishes?
To the king, my lord: your servant Inurta-belu-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord!
... , the king my lord wrote to me. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Witness Silim-Aššur, grand vizier.
to be(come) strong(er) ...
... the sarrānus ...
Month Iyyar (II), 5th day, eponym year of ...
... the house of Ilu-iṣṣur
Witness Nabû-eṭir, chief tailor.
Abi-ram, the deputy of the village manager
18, 8, total 20 — ...
Witness Inurta-šumu-uṣur, scribe.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-nadin-šumi. Good health  to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk very greatly bless the king, my lord!
The palace of Adad-nārārī, king of the universe, son of Arik-dīn-ili, king of Assyria: (brick) belonging to the forecourt of the House of the labūnu.
2 black horses,
The praises of my power which I had constantly heard from the mouth of the people ...
The chariot which goes to the palace and comes back has no driver.
... their ... s, and the captives
Seal of Se'-buna, owner of the woman being sold.
The house of Aššur, the king's temple, which Erišum (I) had built and had become dilapidated: I rebuilt (it) from top to bottom. I deposited my monumental inscription.
As to what you wrote: "I shall send my messenger to the Phrygian" — send him, and let the Phrygian speak kindly with him. And if he sends troops to Bit-Hamban, let them be placed in the hands of the commander-of-fifty, until I arrive personally.
Month Iyyar (II), 20th day, eponym year of Nabû-šar-ahhešu, governor of Samaria.
... Ariye ...
... , they have entered the city of Akkad. The horses ...
5 urnutu-garments ... , for the review ... ;
From Adad-šumu-uṣur.
... the governors ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ra'im-nišešu. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
I have placed them in the palace at the disposal of the chief cupbearer.
... I have not heard any report on ...
Ninurta-apil-Ekur, king of the world, son of Šamaš-rēša-uṣur, king of Assyria:
2 ... ;
Whoever changes and ... this treaty of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, and his sons and grandsons, or ... s or ... s or any human being at all, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Aššur-etel-ilani, king of Assyria, and his sons and grandsons, shall place x minas of refined silver and x minas of pure gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
... the Hittite
40 years Ashur-nerari king of Assyria.
... , in all 2 houses.
On the 21st day he will set out and go to the House of God.
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
6, 7, (of) the chief of the city of Sarugi;
81 82 ... , 73 ... ,
If the moon and sun are in balance: reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
... s of the fort
I have brought 200 (homers) of barley from Sinu and 200 (homers) of wheat from Tillê and deposited them in the town of Mari.
Let the king, my lord, send (word) to the magnates that they should bring the ... of the temple of Šamaš ...
Month Ab (V), 25th day, eponym year of Mannu-ki-Adad.
They are waiting for me ...
... huzunu, remanni-Adad, NN,
... I made him take the road to Damascus. I went after him, defeated him, (and) carried off his booty. I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire his cities. I captured the city Adummatu, his fortified city, together with ... cities in its environs. I captured ... , his fortified city, together with cities in its environs. I captured the city ... , his fortified city, together with cities in its environs. I captured the city ... , his fortified city, together with cities in its environs. I captured
in the well ... the king, my lord, ...
I had foundation inscriptions made of silver, gold, bronze, lapis lazuli, alabaster, basalt, pendû-stone, elallu-stone, (and) white limestone, (as well as) inscribed objects of baked clay, and (then) I depicted on them hieroglyphs representing the writing of my name. I wrote on them the might of the great hero, the god Marduk, (and) the deeds that I had done, my pious work, (and) I placed (these inscriptions) in the foundations (and)
Amriya, ditto, ditto;
The one who drove out Nabû-zēr-kitti-līšir, son of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan); the one who sacked Bīt-Dakkūri, which is in Chaldea, an enemy of Babylon; the one who captured Šamaš-ibni, its king, a rogue (and) outlaw — I surrounded, captured, plundered, destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire the cities Ḫandasu, Mag
Marduk-aplu-iddina,
I surrounded, conquered, (and) plundered the cities Eltekeh (and) Tamnâ. I approached the city Ekron and I killed the governors (and) nobles who had committed crime(s) and hung their corpses on towers around the city; I counted the citizens who had committed the criminal acts as booty; (and) I commanded that the rest of them, (those) who were not guilty of crimes or wrongdoing, (to) whom no penalty was due, be allowed to go free.
Nabû-... , ... of the crown prince;
Witness Šulmu-ahhe.
3 shekels of silver belonging to Bahianu, at the disposal of Ubru-Adad.
in all, 11 ...
Witness Nanî.
The land of the king is well (and) the forts are well.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ululayu. The best of health to the king, my lord! Assyria is well, the temples are well, all the king's forts are well. The king, my lord, can be glad indeed.
... the land of ...
... of the Hittite
I shall send ...
... "
... I gave to ... Aššur-... , his son, ... (and) I said to him: “... you ... Assyria ... you ... to your ... , ... to your ... , ... to your ... , ... like ... ”
5 mares:
He has ... ed his ... and sent (them) to Raṣappa. The ... s who were in ... have not come out to do the work, they are in ... The king, my lord, should know (this).
... the Enlil of the gods
I will bring the ploughs and oxen together
The king, my lord, knows that the day I arrive in his presence, I  (must) come back here posthaste!
Witness ... -ahhe.
the town of Kar-Aya to ...
May the god Adad, the canal inspector of heaven and earth, the canal inspector of the underworld, the exalted lord, the god Adad, strike your land with terrible lightning (and) afflict your land with want.
Witness Nabû-šumu-iddina, scribe, keeper of the contract.
... let them make
The ... s of ...
... , NN, Urdâ, NN,
... to the stronghold of ...
... Aššur-šallim
The gold which the king, my lord, gave me, has been completely refined, (and) I have received it. The house of the treasurer has been completely built, (and) I have installed the doors. The king, my lord, knows that I am building the treasurer's house in the centre of Nineveh. The gold which the king, my lord, gave me, has been completely refined, (and) I have received it. The house of the treasurer has been completely built, (and) I have installed the doors. The king, my lord, knows that
the rites ...
total — Ištar of the House of the Rear Palace.
If the moon is surrounded by a halo, and Regulus stands in it: in that year women will give birth to male children.
The city Kišesim.
Seal of Sasî, owner of the man being sold.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... "
... I invited ... to my palace. I offered before them ... (and) fattened sheep. I held a festival and ... I had (my servants) drench their (the guests’) heads with fine oil (and) perfumed oil... I had them anointed with oil ...
(the ruler) of Moab, ...
From Munnabitu.
Ulūlu (VI), the twenty-fourth day, eponymy of Bēlšunu, the grand vizier (sukkallu rabû) (648).
adjoining ...
among the captives whom ...
Witness Ubru-Nabû, keeper of the contract.
Afterwards, the Babylonians, who had gone forth with Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan) (and) had fled to (the land) Elam, brought the Elamite to Babylon and he (the king of Elam) placed Šūzubu (Nergal-ušēzib), son of Gaḫul (Gaḫal), on the royal throne over them.
To the king, my lord: your servant Šulmu-beli-lašme. Good health to the king, my lord!
The following is (my) bread and fodder per calendar month: God-šarru-uṣur 5 seahs, Ilu-ereš 4 seahs, Hanana 4 seahs, NN 4 seahs, Adad-nerari (III) 4 seahs, Palil-ereš 4 seahs, Sin 4 seahs, Šamaš 4 seahs, Adad 4 seahs, Bel 4 seahs, Nabû 4 seahs, Ištar 4 se
Witness Hiriṣayu.
The lord of kings should ... the (following) matters ... , (and) let him speak with his heart.
... Esaggil and Babylon ...
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Zazaya, the second vizier.
Witness NN, the man in charge of the (offering) pipes.
owner of the ... being sold.
If at the moon's appearance its right horn becomes long, and its left horn short: the enemy's right hand will prevail over the enemy's left hand.
2 seahs 5 'litres' of bread, 5 'litres' of beer — the chief singer.
(Property) of Marduk-šāpik-zēri, the sakrumaš-official of the king.
Palace of Sennacherib, king of Assyria: (This is) the audience gift that Karib-il, king of the land Saba, presented to me. Whoever places (it) in the service of a god (or another) person (or) erases my inscribed name, may the deities Aššur, ... , Šamaš, (and) Adad make his name (and) his seed disappear.
... in Der
I have appointed my brother Ahu-riba in the ... of the Inner City; he will be in charge of the pack animals. The king, my lord, can be glad.
an estate of 1 hectare 5 decares adjoining Marduk-ereš and Sin-šumu-uṣur;
We kept watch on the 29th day; we did not see the moon. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king my lord!
in all, 6: the 'residences' of ...
... his city will be delivered to him.
At the beginning of my kingship, after the great gods appointed me to the kingship of the world and I sat happily on the throne of kingship, Urtaku, the king of the land Elam, a submissive subject who pulls my yoke, rebelled against me and committed hostilities. He sent insolent messages and (then) dispatched his envoys (with messages) of hostility and rebellion. He withheld his audience gift and (vii 10') refused to come before me to do obeisance. He sent insolent (messages) every month by the
to Ilu-...
To the king, my lord: your servant Šamaš-metu-uballiṭ. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
... they will take you away
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-belu-taqqin. Good health to the king, my lord!
I have given two minas of silver to the chief of public works.
The ... :
... here ...
10 ... , 10 ... : the treasurer of the Aššur temple;
... of sissoo-wood;
Month Elul (VI), 20th day, eponym year of Mannu-ki-Adad.
my lord knows that ...
... he (the king) has not done ... ; he has not ... ed the ... of the city wall ... , (and) has not ... ed the ... of the moat. (As for) the ... of the moat, which ... ed much ... , he has not ... ed it.
... the town of the Mušku
The ...
... the babylonians say ...
Concerning the lapis lazuli about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "It was lying in the lap of Bel-šarru-uṣur" — if it was lying in the lap of Bel-šarru-uṣur, why would I take it? When I heard that it had been seized by the (royal) delegate, I wrote to the king, my lord, that it had been seized, (but) not given to me.
... we wrote
... 20 hectares ...
... Assyria ...
Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
On my third campaign, the god Aššur, my lord, encouraged me and I marched to the land Ḫatti. Fear of my lordly brilliance overwhelmed Lulî, the king of the city Sidon, and he fled afar into the midst of the sea and disappeared. The awesome terror of the weapon of the god Aššur, my lord, overwhelmed the cities Great Sidon, Lesser Sidon, Bīt-Zitti, Ṣarepta, Maḫalliba, Ušû, Akzibu, (and) Acco, his
Witness Šamaš-šallim, chariot fighter.
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
... upon ...
Witness Aššur-...
I restored the shrines of Eanna, the abode of the goddess Ištar, mistress of the lands, my lady. I made (them) shine like daylight.
The letter which Nuraya sent to the king, my lord, is a lie.
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial payment from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
... the moat ...
... like a crippled man ... who has no strength, whose limbs are paralyzed, whose eyes are clouded, (and who) has no wisdom, (and) whose ... is not discerning —
(As to) the news of the son of Yakin: he has arrived in the territory of the king, my lord, (but) has not yet arrived in the presence of the king, my lord. The ... s of the son of Yakin ... are in the district of ... ; the ... of the son of Yakin ... in the district of ...
4 litres of honey ...
Witness Sime-Aššur, horse trainer.
... mu
The king, my lord, should send (word) that they should be shown a house each in Nineveh and live there, and (then) let me send my domestics of foreign origin, who were settled in Nippur, to live with them, and may my foreigners be assimilated into the local population.
From Rašil the older, servant of the king.
Total, the offerings of the chief eunuch.
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... I gave to Bel-šuma-iškun ...
130 ...
“You, the divine lady of ladies, the goddess of war, the lady of battle, the advisor of the gods — her ancestors — the one who speaks good thing(s) about me before (the god) Aššur — the father who had engendered you — (so that) at the glance of his pure eyes he desired me to be king — with regard to Teumman, the king of the land Elam (v 15) who placed a burden on (the god) Aššur — the king of the gods, the father who had engendered you — he
I wrote to the Urarṭian as follows: "Why do you seize deserters from my country whom I have sent to the king, my lord? If you seize (them), I shall write to the king, my lord, and he will punish you."
Month Adar (XII), 7th day, eponym year of Abi-ram (677 B.C.).
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur.
as I have heard ...
A tablet of Bel-bunaya to the palace superintendent.
He shall have the usufruct of it for a number of years. He shall have the usufruct of it for a number of years.
The stone weighted 10 minas and 20 shekels according to the king's (standard).
Concerning the news of the king of Elam, my lord, (the following) has been observed in the land: His magnates have been killed, and the son of the king of Elam has been arrested. The king of Elam has heard (this) and sent (word) to have the son of the king of Elam brought in.
... my ... s
Tribute from the land of the people of Unqu.
You know that ...
Shalmaneser, appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Adad-nārārī (I), appointee of the god Enlil, vice-regent of Aššur, son of Arik-dīn-ili (who was) also appointee of the god Enlil (and) vice-regent of Aššur:
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: The fortress and the troops of the king are well. The mood of the people of the land is good. The king, my lord, can be glad.
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, changed or altered the proceedings, or jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
the woman NN, his wife, ... his daughters,
... I built (and) completed ... from its foundations to its crenellations... I strengthened its foundation more than previously... the god Aššur, my lord, in ... (10') ... I deposited my monumental inscriptions.
I sent (this) report to the vizier, my lord, on the 1st of Marchesvan (VIII).
they are very glad ...
... their ... s
... the king ...
The governor of ... has seized the household of NN, the ... , and the household of Zeru-ukin, and given them to the chief cupbearer. He has also seized the ... of the temple of Gula.
... they have gone ...
Disregard that they (may) inflict a defeat and plunder their open country...
As to the ... s about whom I wrote to the Palace, they have now been brought to me from ...
Your servant Nabû-bel-šumate: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: I have sent my messenger to greet the king, the horses and the soldiers.
... is in his charge. No one has authority over him.
... of ... , when
Tablet of Aššur-zeru-ibni to Nabû-eṭir. Good health to my brother!
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord!
x hectares of field in the town of Bit-abi-ila'i; Abbaya, farmer, and his people; Aširâ, farmer, and his people.
Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
... the king, our lord
Witness Basanu, scribe.
... the men who fled
of ...
... the river Uqnû ...
The messenger who went ...
Month ... , 1st day, eponym year of Sin-šarru-ibni.
(As for) Aḫšēri, who did not fear my lordly majesty, (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar placed him in the hands of his servants. The people of his land incited a rebellion against him (and) they cast his corpse into a street of his city. They cut down with the sword the soldiers of his elite guard who had attempted to protect him. They made (the people of) his land carry his body to and fro in the street of his city. They cut down with the sword the soldiers of his elite guard who had attempted to
I cast Kizalaga, the seat of the god Nūru, with eighty-four talents of shiny zaḫalû-metal and made (it) shine like daylight. I had the appurtenance(s) of Ezida, the seat of his great divinity, expertly made through the craft of the god Ninagal and I placed (them) in his sanctuary. I made a beautiful copy of the Abyss, the abode of his great divinity, (and) placed (it) before his seat.
in the temple ...
... me
It shall increase by a fourth.
I have written to you; now do whatever you have to do, and deliver the fortresses  of the king, my lord, into the hands of the king, my lord!
Marduk, the Enlil of the gods, the exalted one, the sage of the gods, the one who knows the hearts of the gods, the one who directs the Igīgū and Anunnakū gods, the one who controls the omens, the one who gives the scepter and the throne to the king who reveres him, the one who gives the name and seed to the king who is worthy of his divinity, the one who makes the foundation of the throne firm, the one who establishes the reign, the one who prolongs the days of the king
Whoever takes away from Aššur any of the palaces that I have  given to Aššur, or (who) erases my inscribed name or the name of my  favourite brother by some crafty device, or (who) destroys or  alters my royal inscription, or (who) disrespects my royal inscription, or  (who) does not place (it) with his (own) royal inscription, or (who)  conceives of anything injurious and puts it into effect to the disadvantage  of Aššur and my palaces:
Your servant Ina-tešî-eṭir: I would gladly die for the king of the lands, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king of the lands, my lord!
As to the eunuch ...
... they placed him ...
I said: "The king, my lord, knows that ...
At that time, I made the enemy people whom I had captured carry baskets (of earth) and they made bricks. I cut down canebrakes in Chaldea and I had their splendid reeds hauled (to Nineveh) for its (the palace’s) construction by enemy soldiers whom I had defeated.
The gold is paid completely. That ... is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
... them to ...
to ...
I gave him the following order:
... is the ... of Nabû-dan
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether Aplaya or his master or his prefect, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Nabû-belu-uṣur and his master,
Witness Nabû-rehtu-uṣur, ...
I have now sent Aššur-ahu-iddina to the Palace. He will speak in the presence of the king what (he has to say). I have sent (word) and he is on his way.
... ,
Witness NN, scribe.
As to Aššur-bessunu about whom the king, my lord, wrote me: "Let him come ...
To the king, my lord: your servant, the chief tailor. Good health to the king, my lord. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord.
I have ... ed to Merodach-Baladan.
Total, 51 — the town of Til-Barsip.
... s, 3 women, ... , 1 son
I sent ...
To the governor, my brother: your sister, Urkittu-naṣir. Good health to my brother!
... I ...
... Now they are bringing horses into Akkad.
Witness NN, scribe.
In the future, in days to come, may a future ruler, when this temple becomes old and dilapidated, restore it. May he restore my inscribed name to its place. (Then) the goddess Ištar will listen to his prayers.
Disregard the (formulation) of today's case, be it good, be it faulty...
May Aššur, the king of the gods, who decrees the fates, decree an evil and unpleasant fate for you. May he not grant you long-lasting old age and the attainment of extreme old age.
(As for) the two sons of Ahu-... , ... and Babilayu, the sons of ... , Nabû-šumu-iddina, the son of Lu-balaṭ, and the rest of the sons of the king of the land Elam, ...
... to the city ...
In the future may a later prince, when that wall becomes dilapidated and he restores (it), restore my monumental inscriptions and inscribed name to their places. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
in accordance with the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord, and your favorable decisions, should the subject of this query, Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, strive and plan, and send the army, as he wishes, against the enemy troops which have now set up camp against the city Ṣiṣṣirtu, a fortress of Harhar,
... s in the inner ... of the camp
... the king, my lord
... I wrote him
If a snake keeps scaring (people) in a temple: anger of the god will befall the land.
... the king, my lord ...
to NN ...
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
Witness NN, son of Hakkî.
... the Cimmerians took fright in the face of the radiance of my weapons ... they brought ... to the land ... (5') ... the land Ellipi ... the land Mannea ...
1, the commander-in-chief of the left ... ;
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
Witness Kenu-balaṭ, horse trainer.
I annexed the city Ḫatarikka, as far as Mount Saue, the city Kašpūna, which is on the shore of the Upper (text: “Lower”) Sea, (and) the cities Ṣimirra (and) Arqâ to Assyria (and) I placed two eunuchs of mine as provincial governors over them.
Aššur-ilaya,
cure of ...
1 ditto of budê-confection;
... of field in the town of E... ,
It shall increase by a fourth.
Witness Aššur-le'i, ...
For the goddess Inanna, mistress of the lands, his lady: Tukultī-Ninurta, king of Assyria, ... made and presented (this object).
Palace of Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), favorite of the great gods, wise prince, circumspect ruler, shepherd of the people, (and) leader of a widespread population, I:
... I shall not cut off my visits (lit. 'foot') to the house of the chief tailor.
saying: "Why did you send ... to NN? The king, my lord, should ask ... "
For the goddess Nanāya, august lady, who dwells in Eḫiliana (“House, Luxuriance of Heaven”), which is inside Eanna, the supreme lady, his lady: Sargon (II), king of the world, viceroy of Babylon, king of Sumer (and) Akkad, shepherd of the land of Assyria, had baked bricks made (and) made the processional way of Eḫiliana shine like daylight.
Your servant Qišti-Adad: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
Month Kislev (IX), 3rd day, eponym year of Sin-šarru-uṣur.
Witness ... -zeru-iddina, palace manager.
5 cans of beer;
The gods Ninurta and Nergal, who love my priesthood, gave to me the wild beasts and commanded me to hunt. I killed 300 strong lions from my ... chariot with my wildly vigorous assault with the spear. I killed 200 wild bulls with my lordly assault with the spear. I killed 100 ostriches like caged birds with the spear. I killed 100 strong elephants with my lordly assault with the spear. I killed 100 strong mountain sheep with my wildly vig
Now then I am sending him to the king, my lord. Let the king, my lord,  question him.
At that time the temple of the goddess Ištar of Nineveh, my mistress, which Šamšī-Adad (III), king of Assyria, son of Išme-Dagan (II), king of Assyria, a prince who preceded me, had previously built — that temple had become dilapidated and I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I completed it from top to bottom and deposited my monumental inscription.
... the city of Kār-Nergal, which is on the bank of the Tigris River, ... I built anew.
... of the eunuch
... and the whole of Karduniaš (Babylonia) ... in the month of Addaru ...
Witness Remanni-Adad, ditto.
from Dur-Šarruken ... the king
3 ditto of chick-peas;
to Aššur-išmanni ...
Witness Inurta-šarru-uṣur, 'third man.'
... is in his charge.
The palace of Tukultī-Ninurta, great king, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Aššur-dān (II) (who was) also king of the universe (and) king of Assyria.
I have given out the provisions for a whole month, by the seah of 10 'litres'.
in the city of Aššur, the great cult centre, for three days ... I set up my camp ...
Bel-na'id, the son of the šandabakku, a member of the Ša-Aššur-dubbu family, a ... , a servant who belonged to the chief eunuch, and a member of the Ša-Aššur-dubbu family, has come to me with his brothers, saying: "The chief eunuch has sent us to you, O Aššur-belu-ka''in, saying: 'Give the bearers of the purple sash (straps) back to their owners.'"
The ... of the Itu'eans which they brought to Calah has been released. They are (now) living in their ... The city lords around them have been subdued.
before the gods ...
Now then I am writing to the king, my lord; let the king, my lord, do as he deems best.
3 ... ;
In the top of the right surface of the 'finger' there is a 'weapon'-mark which faces the top of the 'finger.'
1, prefect of the cavalry;
The old-fashioned razor which stood in the doorway
Yasubu, a man of the 'Left' House, has said: "... "
The king, my lord, wrote to me: "The troops of the Urarṭian have been defeated on (their) expedition against the Cimmerians" —
Witness Pan-Issar-lamur.
... the deaf ...
The temple of the goddess Ištar, my mistress, which Ilu-šumma, a king of the past (who had come) before me, had built — that temple had become dilapidated and I cleared away its debris down to the bottom of the foundation pit. I completed it from top to bottom and deposited my monumental inscription.
Witness Nabû-eriba, deputy team-commander.
You shall not do (anything) that is evil and improper to Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, (nor) to his sons, grandsons, brothers and nephews, (who) are his offspring, (nor) to his prefect, (nor) to his governor, (nor) to his magnates, (nor) to the people of Assyria, (who) are his helpers and supporters, (nor) to any foreigner, (who) is not of Assyrian extraction, (nor) to any eunuch or
The god Ea, king of the apsû, who determines the fates, who in his great wisdom knows the hearts of the gods of heaven and earth, the one who inspects the (four) quarters (of the world), the one who makes opposing forces agree,
The temple of the goddess Ištar, mistress of Nineveh, my mistress, which Sennacherib, king of Assyria, the father of the father who had engendered me, had built, (that temple) had become dilapidated and I rebuilt it from top to bottom. I deposited my monumental inscription.
From this day, the ... th day of this month, the month ... of this year, to the ... th day of the month ... of this year, for 30 days and nights, my stipulated term —
Disregard that I, the haruspex, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, or changed (or) altered the proceedings...
Witness Batulu, servant of ...
which he/they ... to ...
Written according to the original and collated.
... of the men who were impaled.
... s of gold ...
An estate of 100 (hectares of) land in the town of ...
The rest of the tribute I received from Nabû-šuma-iškun, the ... of the city Hamath:
... I did not let (my) army eat the grain (and) dates in their gardens, the fields they had labored in, (and) the crops in the countryside, which is their life’s necessity.
The 11th day: at court, favorable.
Ashur-na'id,
If he does not pay, it shall increase by a fourth.
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Mannu-ki-... , commander-in-chief of Que.
81 cedar roof-beams, 330 cypress roof-beams, 100 elammaku-roof-beams, all fixed;
3 2-seah jars of hinhinu-seeds;
his sons ...
... as he wrote to me
Month Shebat (XI), 1st day, eponym year of Ašaredu.
1 ... of black wool, of the port, not;
... the one who performs the work of the goddesses
... his ... and the town ...
Should Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, appoint the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the position which is written in this papyrus?
Witness Nabû-šumu-iddina.
I put to the sword the population of the city Ḫirimmu, a dangerous enemy, and I did not spare a single one. I hung their corpses on poles and placed (them) around the city. I reorganized that district (and) imposed for eternity one ox, ten sheep, ten homers of wine, (and) twenty homers of dates as his first-fruits offerings to the gods of Assyria, my lords.
I have given clear instructions to the chief of accounts.
... I
The 18th day.
The horses which are in the palace that are to be hitched up,  about which the king, my lord, gave me orders —
... to the land ... by the command of the god Aššur, my lord, I went up to the land ... I brought about a cloud-burst over them and from inside my chariot I blew them away (lit. “washed them away”) like chaff. Arrows quivered like locusts over my forces, (but) not one person among my forces fell. I brought back all together the wounded and the uninjured, the plundered of the land ...
Pulu,
... ;
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
... adjoining the river Saniti,
... wooden ...
these ...
... is set to them
I have brought across the river (and) made the boats pass. The Assyrians who were in my presence crossed the river with their boats. The king should know (this).
Nabû-... is saying: "... "
May Marduk, the great lord, the god who dwells in Esagil, make his name (and) his seed disappear from the land.
total 4 ...
... in my presence ...
adjoining the field of Ša-Aššur-dubbu,
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. The best of health to the king, my lord!
The palace herald enters, kisses the ground before Aššur, and stands with the king, (while) the ... s go out and bring in the censers.
(As for) the land Ulluba, a district in the area of the Brook of Egypt, a place of desertation and famine, (10') one hundred and forty (of its) wells were open (for water) at the beginning of my reign. By the command of the god Aššur, my lord, I marched to that district and (15') made twenty-one of its wells (there) gush with water. I opened up (an additional) one hundred and sixty wells in its environs. I settled there people of the land Kummuḫu
Now ...
9 archers, of the 'third man' type;
As to the carpenters about whom the king, my lord, wrote me: "Why have they left their work and run away?" —
1 ... -garment, of byssus;
... will say ...
2 homers of roasted grain.
The governor of Arrapha has written to me: "The king has ordered me to  receive straw from Dur-Kurigalzu. Now then I have received it ... "
shall place x minas of refined silver (and) x minas of pure gold in the lap of Ištar residing in Nineveh, and shall return the money tenfold to its owners. He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
35 homers of wine, the chief victualler;
of 1,232 ...
1 mina, Nabû-... ;
40, the single-column tablet(s),
The king knows that my men are working on the river. If the king orders, we shall leave our work and go to the river, and if the king orders to transport the timber, we shall transport it across the river.
To the vizier, my lord: your servant Nabû-zeru-iqiša. Good health to my lord!
Witness Ilumma-le'i.
5 sheep, of the (governor) of Calah, at the disposal of Aššur-reṣuwa.
... The 'path' is present...
... the 'weapon'-mark of the 'increment' ...
The charge of the rear palace is well. We have given to the king, our lord, all the captives that we have taken. If there are any left, we will give them to the king, our lord, as soon as they are in our hands.
To the king, my lord: your servant Nadinu. Good health to the king, my lord!
Arzezu,
or in ... ,
Witness Zababa-eriba, 'third man.'
in front of ...
... I sent ... to the king, my lord; the king, my lord, should ask ...
Aššur, the great lord, who ...
... the front red, of the country;
... the farmer
... care of Mar-suri
... the month Sivan (III) ...
... in their midst
... the governor(s)
... their ... s ...
We have no grain store for our work, (so) we cannot store (it) in it.
... the temple of the Queen of the House;
... the land Ulluba
... of Nabû-šuma-iškun ...
... is in his presence. Aššur-... and Aššur-šallim ... have gone to greet him. The king, my lord, should know (this).
When the king, my lord, ... , the town of Til-šikari was devastated.
... this
... to the Babylonians
1 ditto of fish;
I shall send the king's tribute and ... the merchant ...
I carried off people, young (and) old, male and female, horses, mules, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats without number, then I brought him (Ispabāra) to nought and made his land smaller. I detached from his land the cities Ṣi(ṣ)ṣirtu (and) Kummaḫlum, fortified cities, together with the small(er) settlements in their environs (and) the district of the land Bīt-Barrû in its entirety, and I added (this area)
Town of Nineveh — (at) the beginning of the reign
If a planet becomes visible in Elul (VI): the king of the world will die, variant: there will be a revolt.
Instead of his seal he impressed his fingernail.
... big ... s
... , uncanonical omens.
... the land of Arbela
x talents, the ... -garment weaver(s);
a cup of ... ,
... to the king, my lord, ...
... Iau-bi'dî
10 shekels of silver belonging to Ahu'a-amur, at their disposal.
NN, reporter.
Month of Bēlat-ekallim, eponymy of Atar-ili, governor of the city Carchemish (791 B.C.).
shall give 10 minas of silver ...
... I gave ... as a gift ... the god Nabû ... my ... I built anew ...
... he has seized ... , saying: "The king has given orders to me, saying: '... '"
... the king, my lord, ...
Witness Haldi-ahu-iddina, horse trainer of the royal bodyguard.
Your servant Sama', the 'house-openers' of the palace. I would gladly die for the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
The covering of the roof that (hangs) over the corridors — I made their somber atmosphere cheerful, making (them) as bright as day. (vi 1) I decorated them with silver and copper knobbed nails. I adorned the arches, friezes, and all of the copings with baked bricks (glazed in the color of) obsidian (and) lapis lazuli.
... Sagab, Nabû-naṣir ...
which on the other side ...
The palace of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, located in the city Tarbiṣu, which is on the bank of the River Nairi, ...
in the days ...
... he has no ... s
I made foundation inscriptions, had the might of the god Aššur, my lord, (and) my deeds inscribed on them, and I placed (them) in the foundations (and) left (them) for ever after for the kings, my descendants.
The day that he ... ,
From Nabû-iqbi.
... , Ṭab-belu-uṣur, a total of 10 men,
... the prophetess who ...
NN, his son, his wife, his 2 daughters,
Witness Aššur-le'i, 'third man.'
Issar-... , ... ;
Total, (in) the city of Kār-Tukultī-Ninurta, (in) the palace complex, (in) the courtyard of the palace of Aššur-dān, (in) the room of the šaḫuru of Aššur-dān, my lord.
Ilu-eriba;
... Se'-abu-...
The money is paid completely. That house is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
That which is (written) upon a throne of ivory, ebony, (and) boxwood, (and) upon a throne of gold, silver, (and) bronze.
a writing-board ...
... now
... the king, my lord
... one ditto, second (size), the base not,
... the ... who ... the ... of his land ... son of NN
1 male sheep, of the meal ... ;
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
The king should not listen to the lies of ...
Sasî, ditto, ... ;
Kaštaritu, city lord of Karkaššî, who has sent a messenger to Nabû-šuma-iškun the ... , saying: "Let us stand together, mobilize an army and go to wage war against the army of the Medes" —
... house ...
At the beginning of my kingship, in my first year, when the god Aššur, my lord, entrusted me to rule over the land and people, the goddess Ištar, (my) mistress, presented me with a royal destiny as my lot. She raised me like (my own) birth-mother, killed my foes, cut down my adversaries, (and) gladly made me sit on the royal throne of the father who had engendered me.
On the ... th day NN and Bel-qate-sabat came to me saying: "The king has given us orders about ... ; we are to bring the ... from the other side (of the river)."
... seah of  8 'litres'
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial payment from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats. (ii 1) Moreover, he sent to me his sister, together with a large marriage gift, to serve as a housekeeper, and he kissed my feet... the house of his lord ...
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
At that time, (with regard to) Ebabbar, the awe-inspiring shrine, the residence of the god Aššur, my lord, (and) whose construction Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, the father who had engendered me, had begun, I completed its work through the craft of the god Kulla and made (it) shine like daylight.
I and ...
In order to open that canal, I sent an exorcist (and) a lamentation singer and ordered the digging of a canal. For five days, I made them dig with picks and shovels, and (then) a canal inspector and an engineer went down (there) with (only) twenty men and they dug it out with picks and shovels.
(whether) within this stipulated term,
Be present in this ram, place (in it) a firm positive answer, favorable designs, favorable, propitious omens by the oracular command of your great divinity, and may I see (them).
... the king, my lord, wrote ...
I have written to the city of ...
... I returned ... I restored ... its ... and its sanctuaries. I ... the city Aššur ... I built (and) completed (it) from its foundations to its crenellations. I made (it) greater than before. I settled therein the goddess Ištar, my mistress, and the gods of Assyria, all of them. I deposited my monumental inscriptions.
... the treaty
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "What news is there?" The son of Yakin has entered Waisi, and is going to meet the son of Irtukkanu. The king, my lord, should know (this). If the son of Yakin falls into their hands, the king, my lord, should know (this) also. The king, my lord, should not leave it at that. The king, my lord, should do something.
... are left over.
In the base of the middle surface of the 'finger' there is a 'weapon'-mark which faces the middle of the 'finger.'
x minas of silver by the mina of the king, belonging to Dannaya, at the disposal of Dadi-hari.
(As for) the people of the land Karzibra, a dangerous enemy who since time immemorial had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors, and, with regard to me, had not grasped the feet of my royal majesty, they seized Tandāya, their city ruler, and brought (him) before me. (i 80') By the command of the god Aššur, my lord, I received from them their substantial payment, which included gold, silver, (and) linen garments with multi-colored trim. I imposed upon them (the same state of
Witness Nabû-šumu-iškun, chariot driver.
... I sent him ...
The report on Urarṭu is still the same: they have not advanced, and no troops of theirs have been killed.
in all 588 horses, 7 mules:
Palace of Sargon (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad;
Assurbanipal, the crown prince of the Succession Palace, who is now ill, and on whom the 'hand' of god ... is being 'placed' in extispicy —
If a cloudbank lies in the path of the sun: the king of the world will widen his understanding.
The chief of granaries has not been present for the past two years. Now, if the king, my lord, (so) commands, let him come and take up his post. The granaries have been neglected for a long time. There is a shortage of stored grain in the city of Aššur. The king, my lord, should know (this).
I have sent ...
14 ... ;
Nabû-šar-ahhešu;
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, scribe.
... I sent a eunuch of mine, the chief eunuch, to the land of the Manneans. The king of the land of the Manneans, (... ) Ullusunu, (... ) who had not bowed down to the kings, my ancestors, bowed down to my yoke. He ... large horses as his audience gift and he kissed my feet.
Now, if the king, my lord, commands, I shall go and speak with him; perhaps he will agree to enter into the treaty.
Ikūnum, vice-regent of Aššur, for his life and the well-being of his city
8 'litres' ...
The Urarṭian has written to me: "The troops of the king of Assyria are blocking the pass of Uriakka; if the king of Assyria ... s
(the ruler) of Byblos;
Moreover, I struck with the sword Teušpa, a Cimmerian, a barbarian whose home is remote, together with his entire army, in the territory of the land Ḫubušna. I imposed upon him a heavy tribute, 2,000 talents of silver, (and) 1,000 talents of bronze, and imposed (it) upon him annually.
The palace of Aššur-...
I opened up a foundation pit for the outer wall, Badnigerimḫuluḫa, (which means) “Terrorizer of Enemies,” then I dug down forty-five nindanu and made (it) reach the water table. I bound together strong mountain stone in the water below and above I expertly carried out its construction with large limestone (blocks) up to its copings. I enlarged the structure of the palace to 700 large cubits along (its) longer side and 440 large cubits along (its) shorter side and (thus)
As to the work on the ziggurat of ... , I have brought out the local population and made them carry baskets, and I have brought out the local boats as well.
To the king, my lord: your servant Adad-šumu-uṣur. Good health to  the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
The king, my lord, knows that the people of Ṣimirra are very much at ease with each other. (If) a stranger comes into their presence and asks for a house, they will give it to him. (But) if a stranger comes into my presence and asks for a house from me, I will not give it to him. I have sent (word) and they have made the whole city aware of him, and nobody will give a house to him. Now, if he really wants a house, he will have to pay for it in full, just as a stranger would. He will not get a
Silim-aša, ditto.
... the ... who are in the presence of the king
Witness Mannu-ki-Ninua, ...
... now
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
Whoever in the future, at any time, lodges a complaint, whether these men or their sons or grandsons, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Šumma-ilani, his sons and grandsons,
Witness Nabû-šallimšunu.
a writing-board ...
(As for) him, Umman-menanu (Ḫumban-menanu), the king of the land Elam, along with the king of Babylon (and) the sheikhs of Chaldea who marched at his side, terror of doing battle with me overwhelmed them like alû-demons. They abandoned their tents and, in order to save their lives, they trampled the corpses of their troops as they pushed on.
from the city of ...
On account of this, when the god Aššur, my lord, faithfully chose me to worship him, gave me the scepter for my office of shepherd, (and) placed upon me the just scepter for my office of herdsman; when the god Nabû, the scribe of everything, granted me (the ability) to write and speak, to make (those) who do not listen to me ... ; (and when) the goddess Ištar, the lady of war and battle, gave me (the ability) to fight with my enemies and to overthrow
On the 17th day the king goes down to the House of God.
If the moon becomes late at an inappropriate time and is not seen: attack of a ruling city.
To the king of the lands, my lord: your servant Bel-iddina. May Bel, Nabû and Šamaš bless the king, my lord!
... Marduk-šumu-uṣur from ...
... I ...
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
The messenger of the city-lord of ... has come to me, saying: "The men of the house of ... are building a fort in the house of the magnates."
scribe, keeper of the tablet.
... will go
The king, my lord, knows that the previous campaign which I  directed was in the interest of the king, my lord. Now, if it is  acceptable to the king, my lord, I will direct another one in the  interest of the king, my lord. I will write to the king, my lord,  whatever it is that the king, my lord, commands.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
Total, 70, in the district of the city of Nineveh.
Disregard that the day is overcast and it has rained...
the men ...
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
... Ištar ...
Nabû-šarru-uṣur has written to me as follows:
Seal of Nabû-ahhe-šallim, son of Nabû-zeru-lešir, owner of the vineyard being sold.
If Venus becomes visible in the mišhu of Sagittarius: a strong enemy will raise his weapons against the land; the enemy will tear down the city gate ...
If in Tebet (X) the moon becomes visible on the 29th day: the Ahlamû will devour Subartu; a foreigner will rule the Westland.
... I wrote him
The money is paid completely. That woman is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
(and) the chief of the equipment of the enemy ...
Anu and Antu, the Great Gods, the Narudi, Nusku, Šala, Ea-šarru, Damkina, Usumû, Kittu, Mišaru, Šakkan, the Fates,
Aplu-iddina from the city of Haurina.
200 (homers) of wine.
Witness NN.
the presence of ...
... the lord of ...
... horse trainers of the open chariotry ...
If on the 14th day the moon and sun are seen together: the speech of the land will become reliable; the land will become happy; the king will become happy; the cattle of Akkad will lie in the steppe undisturbed.
If Jupiter becomes visible in the path of the Anu stars: the king of Akkad will become strong and overthrow his enemies in all lands in battle.
An estate of 1 decare of field in ...
... his people
The moon which is seen is (a reflection of) the constellation Scorpius. It stood in the halo of the moon.
10 hectares, the town of ... ;
Sa'ilu, his servant —
... of field in the town of Uqimutaya
— Jupiter stands in the halo of the moon.
From Bulluṭu.
Kanunayu, servant of the king, in the household of Ašipâ.
... they saw ...
with ...
I built a city in the steppe (and) named it Dūr-Yakīn. I brought the gods Ea, Sîn, Šamaš, Adad, and Ninurta, the great gods, my lords, out of their (text: “its”) inner sanctums, which were in Nineveh, and made (them) dwell inside it on (their) eternal dais(es).
... , ... -nadin-apli, his son, ... ;
2 ... -garments, the front red, of the port, not;
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, am dressed in my ordinary soiled garments, have eaten, drunk, or anointed myself with anything unclean, have changed or altered the proceedings, or jumbled the oracle query in my mouth...
Tukultī-Ninurta, king of the universe, strong king, king of Assyria, king of kings, lord of lords, ruler of rulers, prince, lord of all, conqueror of the rebellious — those who do not submit to him (and) who are hostile to the god Aššur—, crushers of the lands of the Uqumanu and Papḫu — difficult mountain (regions) —, defeater of the princes of the Qutu as far as the land Meḫru, disperser of the forces of the land of
The palace of Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, son of Sennacherib, king of the world (and) king of Assyria — I had the gatehouse, which is in the palace in Baltil (Aššur), built anew for coming and going (and) I firmly founded its foundation with white limestone. I had the name of the palace written on tablets of silver, gold, (and) bronze and I placed (them)
... whose kings, my ancestors, used to regularly receive the tribute of the rulers of the four quarters (of the world) and whose fame (these kings) had established in the whole world by their mighty deeds, (but) not one among them (the kings) had conceived of and put his mind towards building a magnificent palace, ... or increasing the site of the city, ...
Town of Bet-Ea-šabat, Ṣalam-ani, the mayor.
... ; Abi-hari, his son, adolescent;
The eunuchs of the king who are in Elam have come down (and) submitted to me.
On the 2nd day we ... ed ...
Month Tishri (VII), 22nd day, eponym year of Ilu-isse'a.
Month ... , 8th day, eponym year of Aššur-bani (713 B.C.).
in all, 78 ... men ...
I received the payment of Kuštašpi of the city Kummuḫu, Raḫiānu (Rezin) of the land Damascus, Menahem of the city Samaria, Hiram of the city Tyre, Sibitti-biʾil of the city Byblos, Uriakki (Urikki) of the land Que, Pisīris of the city Carchemish, Ḫamatāiu of the land (lit. “city”) Judah, Qaʾuš-gabri of the land Edom, Muṣ
her witnesses. Witness Tarditu-Aššur, lamentation priest.
The 'third men' have come and said: "The river is navigable as far as the Mukranu bridge; beyond that the river is difficult." The governor of Til-Barsip and the prefects of Nineveh have left (their posts) and are (now) working in their (own) districts.
The lower part is elevated. The base of the middle part is 'loose.' The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number. The heart of the ram is normal...
... I said: "Why ...
1 woman, 1 boy of 4 spans, 2 girls of 3 spans: in all, 5 people.
I shall do ...
... his ... to his ...
The servants of the king, my lord, who ... to the governor
Disregard that I, the haruspex your servant, have jumbled the oracle query in my mouth, or changed (or) altered the proceedings...
... said, saying: "...
... the 'cavity' is ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-ahhe-eriba. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
1 box of ... ,
... :
I shall bring the ... horses and come. The ... horses are not coming.
The men of the king, my lord, who ... , have entered the city of ... ; I am sending to the king, my lord, the men who left (their) work.
Witness Tabalayu. Witness Urdu-Nanaya.
... the 7th day, the 8th day, the 9th day, the ... day,
the gods Aššur, Anu, Enlil, ... , Adad, Šala, ... , the great gods who go before me, rendered a just verdict for me concerning Ummanigaš (Ḫumban-nikaš II). Tammarītu rebelled against him and struck him, together with his family, down with the sword. Tammarītu, who was (even) more insolent than Ummanigaš, sat on the throne of the land Elam.
To the king, my lord: your servant Šarru-emuranni. Good health to the king, my lord!
... the commandant
Basnî ...
and the servant of Ku...
Witness NN.
... the dead ones whom the king, my lord
Witness Ibašši-ila'i, son of Babilayu.
... of the sheep
of the king, my lord, ...
I have sent Umman-minâ to the Palace. He says:
I placed Bēl-šarru-uṣur, a eunuch of mine, on his royal throne (and) entrusted him with the people of the land of Sumer and Akkad. I appointed my eunuchs to be governors over all of the districts of Chaldea and I imposed the yoke of my lordship upon them. (vii 10') The former kings of the land of Sumer and Akkad had abandoned their post(s) in the face of Tukultī-Ninurta, my forefather, and had gone to
The king should not say: "He is not a sinner; he did not lie to me; he did not betray me; he is a loyal subject who has done a favour for the king, my lord."
I placed at their service the former ramku-priests, pašīšu-priests, (and) ecstatics, those initiated in secret rites. I set before them purification priests, āšipu-priests, lamentation priests, (and) singers, who have mastered (their) entire craft. I appointed before them purification priests, āšipu-priests, lamentation priests, (and) singers, who have mastered (their) entire craft.
... three ...
Etušmes, “House of the great mountain”: the house of Belat-ekalli.
As to Šarru-emuranni about whom the king, my lord, gave me orders, I have reviewed the men: 50 in number, all (of them) chariot-horse-trainers.
20 hectares of arable land, 10 hectares under cultivation therein.
... the mule express of Calah
To the king, my lord: your servant ... Good health to the king, my lord!
Perhaps the king, my lord, will say: "... to the Inner City
... their ...
... he is bringing to a standstill
Ea, Belet-ili, Damkina and Ninurta go to the palace and enter the house of Dagan.
... to their places ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Give 200 door-beams to the magnates who are building houses in your district!" — I have given 200 door-beams to the magnates who are building houses in my district. Now, if the king, my lord, orders, I shall give 200 door-beams to the magnates who are building houses in another district.
(whether) they will kill what there is to kill, plunder what there is to plunder, and loot what there is to loot,
of the palace of the king ...
Adad-nerari (III), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Šamši-Adad (V), king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Shalmaneser (III), king of the four quarters:
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
From Rašil the older, servant of the king.
total — the goddess Dinitu.
Total 100 (women) — (governor of) Nineveh.
until ...
... one ... of the king ...
The enemy is ...
x shekels of silver on ...
... to the king, my lord.
From Balasî.
... to the king
... to my feet
1 writing-board ...
I appointed ... -le'i.
When the king performs the nāṭu of the Lady-of-the-River before Šamaš, he performs it in the same way before the bed. He places the head and the feet upon a ...
... did not come ... ; they are staying in ... , eating bread and drinking wine.
the men of Na...
... who ... , saying: "... will hear and ... "
... he has appointed ... to the house of ...
The lower part is elevated ...
The chariot of the god Aššur, my lord, which goes to the House of Aššur
If it is agreeable to the chief eunuch, let the ... be performed on the 20th of Elul (VI), and let them give the king, my lord, a firm positive answer.
... the 'cap' of the lung is split...
I wrote to you: "Give the captives in your charge to Aššur-šarru-uṣur, and let him take them to the Palace." Did he take them to the Palace?
You truly selected me, Aššur, to put these matters right, and you (are the one) who placed your sweet protection over me, Sargon, and (made me) attain my wish. You (are the one) who placed your sweet protection over my (military) camp and (protected) my (military) camp from the east to the west. You (are the one) who killed my enemies (and) cut down my foes; you (are the one) who made all of the rulers who are hostile to me bow down at my feet and (made me) stand
Witness Aššur-reṣuwa, chief porter of the queen.
... me, the maid of theirs
May the king, my lord, write me about the news of the king, my lord.
... you ...
of ...
Witness Šamaš-šarru-hattu.
To the god Aššur, his lord: Sargon (II), presented (this object) for the sake of his life.
and Nabû-šezib before ...
Nabû-šezibanni, the legate of Borsippa, who administers correctly the rites of the great gods.
The 'third man' of ...
I built (and) completed a city in the plain of the city Ḫalulê (and) named it Qibi-Aššur. I constructed inside it palatial halls using (lit.: “of”) elephant ivory, ebony, boxwood, musukkannu-wood, cedar, cypress, daprānu-juniper, and terebinth.
... the temple ...
Disregard that the ram (offered) to your divinity for the performance of the extispicy is deficient or faulty...
The king, my lord, should not ... me! I am a servant of the king, my lord, (but) the king has treated me as if I did not keep the watch of the king, my lord.
A tablet of ... to NN, his brother: I am well, you may be happy. The king, my lord, should not be worried about the city of HAR.
Because Nabû-aplu-iddina ... to Babylon
NN, farmer, and his people; ... , farmer, and his people in the town Ša-pî-šimî.
Witness Šamaš-šallim, cohort commander.
Marduk-apla-iddina ...
... the farmers of the ...
Witness Abba-ra'û, ...
I built (and) completed that palace from its foundations to its battlements. I deposited in it inscribed objects bearing my name.
The Ukkean merchants who went to Babylon for the (purpose of) obtaining a royal order — I myself have now given them an order:
Month Tishri (VII), ... th day, eponym year of Nabû-ahu-iddina.
Bel-ereš and Abi-rahî have contracted and bought it for 1 mina of silver.
As to what you wrote to me: "May I hear my brother's answer to (my) letter!" — I have now sent my brother's letter to you.
Witness Aplî.
The priest of Aššur circumambulated the House. The baker, the brewer, the ... , the warden of the House of Aššur and the ... went (away).
Witness Paršidu, village manager.
I have written to my brother what I have heard.
As to the town about which the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why have you not sent me any news of it?" — the town is under the authority of the Palace Herald. If ... is agreeable to him, he will ... it; if not, he will ... it.
... the eunuch of the mayor
all the Babylonians ...
... and if they do not do the work,
10 ...
... his ... s, his horse ...
... of the days
Ditto by Ištar of Nineveh and Ištar of Arbela!
In the future, may one of the sons, grandsons, (great grand)sons, or (great, great grand)sons, one of the kings, my descendants, whom the god Aššur and the goddess Ištar name to rule the land and people, renovate the dilapidated section(s) of that palace when it becomes old and dilapidated.
Witness Nabû-ahu-uṣur, royal bodyguard.
The money is paid completely. That man is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
I have sent my messengers to you; why have they returned empty-handed ... ?
If the sun rises and (is as if) dyed red: the land will see plenty ...
Witness Nuhšaya, porter.
Izzia, eunuch of the king, has contracted and bought (said property) from these gentlemen for 10 minas of silver.
... the Mannean ...
I have written down the ... s of the ... and the ... of the city-overseer, and am herewith sending (the information) to the king, my lord.
2 ... ;
The money is paid completely. Those people are purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
As to what you wrote to me: "May the king, my lord, send word that they should ask Nabû-ušabši; if he says yes, they should give the house to me. If not, I shall come and speak to the king, my lord, (about the matter)." — did I not send the house to you? When your brother was alive, I gave it to you. Now that my brother is dead, what have you done? You have taken the house of your brother for yourself, angrily driving out my servants and my family, and turning my house into your
(As for) Nabû-naʾid (and) Bēl-ēṭir, sons of Nabû-šuma-ēreš, the šandabakku (governor of Nippur), whose father, the one who had engendered them, had stirred up Urtaku to fight with the land Akkad — the bones of Nabû-šuma-ēreš, which they had taken out of the land Gambulu to Assyria,
Bel-iqišanni,
Witness NN. Witness Barruqu.
I wrote to you: "... to the river
Witness Ququ.
all to ...
As to the eunuch of the ...
I am sending them to the king, my lord, in charge of my messenger.
total — the man from Assyria.
who is in charge of ...
The people of the whole country have gone into hiding.
The king mounts the rikshaw ...
A tablet of the palace scribe to the chief ... of the palace.
I have now sealed the letter and am forwarding it to the Palace.
Nabû-aplu-iddina and Nabû-šallim ...
Written according to the original and collated.
Total 23 horses,
Month Ab (V), 18th day, eponym year of ...
The king, my lord, knows that the woman who is in the service of  Inurta-ila'i is the sister of Nabû-šumu-iddina. She fled to me ...
... the men of the Itu'eans ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-šumu-iddina. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Ištar bless the king, my lord!
The breast-bone is thick. The coils of the colon are 14 in number.
You shall not do (anything) that is evil and improper to Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, (or) to his sons, grandsons, brothers and nephews, (but) guard him and protect him in country and in town. You shall not seize him and put him to death, nor hand him over to his enemy, nor oust him from the kingship of Assyria, nor swear an oath to any other king or any other lord.
I have set out from where the king sent me and am coming to where the king sent me.
1 ditto of grapes; a ditto of olives;
In the month Shebat (XI), the festival of the king of the gods, the god Aššur, I mustered my troops (and) took the direct road against the Arameans, who since time immemorial had not submitted to the kings, my ancestors. In the month Adar (XII), (the month) of the god Ea, the ... of the Arameans, I brought about their defeat inside (the city) Tīl-Tūba.
... , ...
... in this way
And now, even before the king, my lord, wrote me, I have sent the son of Yakin to greet the king, my lord.
the corn tax ...
Let the king, my lord, write me what the king commands.
Nabû-šezib, scribe, deputy team-commander.
The name of the other one is Tammaritu, son of Idin-Ea.
... to five
... the gate of ...
what I did ...
... I wrote ...
... who
Concerning the sheep offerings about which the king, my lord, wrote to me,  they will be made this (very) day.
I brought out the auxiliary forces of the Arameans (and) Chaldeans who were in Uruk, Nippur, Kish, (and) Ḫursagkalama, together with the guilty citizens, and I counted (them) as booty.
I have now written down the names of all the citizens of Assyria who have been sold for money to Babylon, and I am herewith sending (this information) to the king, my lord. There are many Babylonians in Assyria, and the king, my lord, should know (this). Should the king, my lord, say: "Why have you not written me (about this)?" —
Witness Nabû-šumu-iddina, mayor.
The money is paid completely. That field is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
Witness NN, citizen of Nineveh.
... eclipse in the morning watch
If the Fish star comes close to the top of the moon and stands there: the king will live for many days; there will be truth and justice in the land.
... writing-board ...
their ... s ...
... Aššur-šarru-uṣur
To the king, my lord: your servant Mannu-ki-Adad. Good health to the king, my lord!
... is not good ...
As to what Bel-naṣir, the king's servant, wrote to the king, my lord: "...
Witness NN, 'third man.'
I have now sent to the king, my lord, 20 men, 30 donkeys and 10 camels with my messenger. The 10 camels are from the household of the queen mother; the 20 men and 30 donkeys are from the household of Aššur-zeru-iddina. I have appointed a eunuch over them. They are on their way to the king, my lord.
Ditto, ditto; just as a bird is caught by a trap, so may they deliver you, your brothers and your sons into the hands of your enemy.
to the king, my lord, ...
... , x persons; NN, ...
Month ... , ... th day, eponym year of Sagab (651).
the district ...
Seal of Še... ,
Nabû-balassu-iqbi
... a cup of oil;
Why does my lord keep silent (while) I wag my tail and run about like a dog? I have sent two letters to my lord; why does my lord not consent to send an answer to (my) letter?
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... the Deans
The architect ...
Aya-ehu... , Witness Ba...
... Belet-balaṭi ...
One litre of honey, one litre of oil by the copper seah of 10 'litres' belonging to Aššur-zeru-ibni, at the disposal of Ša-la-mašê, the cupbearer.
For the god Enlil, king of the gods, sovereign of heaven and netherworld, prince (who decides) the fates, his lord: Ashurbanipal, his obedient shepherd, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, (re)built Ekur, his beloved temple, with baked bricks.
... the Itu'ean ... who is in Nineveh
Disregard that ... an evil eye ...
... the temple of the god Adad
Your servant NN: I would gladly die for the king, my lord! May Enlil, Ninurta, and Nusku bless the king, my lord! Say to the king, my lord:
If the moon becomes visible in Sivan (III) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
Witness Nabû-naṣir, horse trainer of the palace.
The baker and the brewer have the usufruct of the intestines and  the bugurru of the bull of the 2nd day.
Samsī-... , ... , has written to me: "The son of Ṣillaya has written to me: 'As to the news of the son of Yakin, he is in ... ; the men ... who went with him have returned ... '"
He (Puzur-Aššur) built the temple of the god Aššur, his lord, and made (it) shine like daylight. He made (it) as bright as the sun for the god Aššur, his lord. He made (it) as bright as daylight for the god Aššur, his lord. He made (it) as bright as daylight for the god Aššur, his lord. He made (it) as bright as daylight for the god Aššur, his lord. He made (it) as bright as day
If the moon and sun are in opposition: the king of the land will widen his understanding.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ṭab-ṣill-Ešarra. Good health to the king, my lord! May Aššur and Mullissu bless the king, my lord!
... the palace superintendent and the scribes of the king, my lord, who are in ...
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
I sent (this) report to the Palace on the 1st of Marchesvan (VIII).
The forts of the king, my lord, are well.
... the fort ...
Remuttu, ... , and ...
Witness Šumma-ilani.
1 prayer bowl ditto;
Moreover, (as for) Ṣidqâ, the king of the city Ashkelon who had not bowed down to my yoke, I forcibly removed the gods of his father’s house, himself, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his brothers, (and other) offspring of his father’s house and took him to Assyria.
... until the king, your father, ...
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
The palace of Aššur-nārārī, vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Išme-Dagan (II), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Šamšī-Adad (V), vice-regent of the god Aššur, son of Shalmaneser (III), vice-regent of the god Aššur: I slew wild oxen on the Euphrates.
I have now sent (word) and they are bringing him to me. As soon as he is on his way to me, I shall write to the king, my lord, whatever news there is.
5 talents, the land of the city of Guzana.
I appointed over them Bēl-ibni, a son of a rab banî (and) a scion of Šuanna (Babylon), who had grown up like a young puppy in my palace, as king of the land of Sumer and Akkad.
I am Sennacherib, the circumspect king.
Month Iyyar (II), 10th day, eponym year of Šarru-lu-dari, governor of Lahiru.
(As for) the Cimmerians, a dangerous enemy who had never feared my ancestors, and, with regard to me, had not grasped the feet of my royal majesty, (iii 1) with the support of (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar, my lords, he (Gyges) clamped (them) in manacles, handcuffs, (and) neck-stocks and sent (them) before me, together with his substantial audience gift(s).
On my third campaign, I marched against Baʾalu, the king of the land Tyre who resides in the middle of the sea. Because he did not honor my royal command(s and) did not obey the pronouncement(s) from my lip(s), I set up outposts against him. To prevent his people from leaving, I reinforced (its) garrison. By sea and dry land, I took control of (all of) his routes (and thus) cut off (all) access to him. (i 85') I made water and food for the preservation of
... I shall set out
Month of the god Sîn, eponymy of Šamaš-nāṣir (794 B.C.).
Witness Bel-abu'a.
NN, ... , has contracted and bought it for x minas of silver ...
7 big loaves;
As to the towns in the environs of Sapirrutu about which my lord wrote to me, I have now taken hold of them.
The king of Elam sent a sealed order to the sheikhs of Hupapani and Pillat: "Give the king's men back to him!"
At that time, (with regard to) Imgur-Enlil, the great wall of Babylon, its foundations had become shaky, its superstructure had collapsed, its walls had buckled, its door-jambs had disintegrated, and its door-bolts had been carried off by the Euphrates River. (As for) the people of Babylon who had become frightened by these deeds, they took to the streets and squares of Babylon and, in order to save their lives, they fled inside the city gates. (As for) the rulers and nobles
... the Babylonians ...
The singer intones, “My lord, you are the Lord of Kings.” The king places a finger on the neck of the singer, says “Aḫulap!” and goes (away).
Salamannu,
they are very much at his disposal ...
Witness NN, royal bodyguard.
to the command of the god ...
... the gods of the king ... the king ...
Witness Nabû-šarru-uṣur, eunuch.
The king, my lord, should send (word) that they should bring me ... ; otherwise I  (shall) fetch them ... on the 5th of Tishri (VII).
The weapons of the great gods ...
As for the one who removes my inscriptions and my name: May the god Adad, the canal inspector of heaven and earth, strike his land with terrible lightning (and) afflict his land with want.
The king should send (word) that they ask (him) how much barley there is left.
The Urarṭian troops crossed over to me (on the 7th) and are encamped outside the city. They have sent me the following message: "The governor of ...
... I settled ... in a peaceful abode... (5') ... I imposed upon them tax (and) tribute, (and) they (now) pull my yoke. Every year, they send me their gifts and ... their ... I established ... and I placed a eunuch of mine over them.
Witness ... a, ...
In the future may a later prince, when that temple becomes dilapidated and he restores (it), restore my monumental inscriptions and inscribed name to their places. (Then) the god Aššur will listen to his prayers.
To the goddess Šarrat-nipha, his lady: Šamšī-Adad, the scepter, presented (this object) for the sake of his life.
Concerning the offerings about which the king, my lord, wrote to me, it is favourable to make them this month. Let them make them tomorrow (or) the day after tomorrow, whenever it (best) suits the king. It is favourable to make them this month.
Šamaš-kettu-... ,
The merchant who brought it said: "I was told that it was a royal order to give the necklace to the temple of Nabû. When I heard (this), I refused to give it, saying: 'Who do you think you are, (you) merchant? I will not give it without a sealed order from the king.'"
I had an inscribed object made and had inscribed on it all the mighty victories that I achieved over my enemies with the support of the god Aššur, my lord, and (then) I placed (it) inside the wall. I inscribed on it the name of the great ruler, my lord, and I deposited (it) for ever after.
Seal of Nabû-riba-ahhe, scribe.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
May the name of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord, be set like a thorn in my heart!
... in the charge of Nabû-le'i, the sartinnu
2,000 ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "May the gods of heaven and earth bless the king, my lord!" — they are indeed blessing the king, my lord.
a ditto of olives;
The chariot which goes to the Akitu House and comes back has no driver. Without a driver it rocks about.
Mannu-ki-... ;
the servant of theirs ...
... he will come. Now ... he is collecting
... his face
Good health to my lord!
To the king, my lord: your servant, Akkullanu. Good health to the king, my lord!
... you, O Marduk
Ullusunu, the Mannean, who went to the aid of the Gurreans,
... the son of Anu
The king gives 4 litres of bread, 4 litres of beer, 1 seah of oil and 1 seah of honey. The king goes to the house of Šamaš. He illuminates the face. He performs a sheep offering before Aššur and Mullissu. He performs one before Mašmaš and the Conquerors. He performs one before the Golden Chariot and before Bel-šarru.
You are the true seed of Aššur, the true seed of Ešarra, the true seed of the House of Succession, the true seed of the divine chariot, the true seed of the divine bow, the true seed of the divine arrow, the true seed of the divine quiver, the true seed of the divine shield, the true seed of the divine bodyguard, the true seed of the divine 'third man,' the true seed of the divine chariot driver, the true seed of the divine 'third man,' the true seed of the divine bodyguard, the true seed of the divine bow,
Mannu-ki-Arbail, ... , and the eunuchs and ... of the king, my lord, have made a treaty with one another
Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, viceroy of Ur, built anew the Gipāru, the house of the supreme goddess, beloved wife of the god Sîn.
I tore down that small palace in its entirety, then I changed the course of the Tebilti River, repaired (the effects of) the erosion, and directed its outflow.
... the king, my lord
Witness Kinaya.
Witness Banitu-šarru-uṣur, palace farmer of the queen.
A tablet of ... -ereš to the king, his lord. Good health to the king, my lord!
The 'weapon'-mark of the 'increment' rises to the left.
Month Nisan (I), eponym year of Ša-Nabû-šû.
... they have appointed ...
Now, the king, my lord, should not say: "He is a traitor!" He is a servant who has been rewarded twice. He guarded the king's garrison, and (then) he was dismissed and deported. What is wrong (in that)? The king, my lord, should not say: "He is a traitor!"
Witness NN.
20 sheaves — Nabû-zeru-lešir
Witness ... -Nabû.
Concerning the ... about which the king, our lord, wrote to us, is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
The news of the son of Yakin: he has left Babylon and gone to the city of Aššur. He is on his way to Aššur.
... of the god Aššur, king of the universe, son of Ninurta-apil-Ekur (who was) also king of the universe;
1 seah 1 'litre' of spiced loaves; a 2-seah jar of hammurtu-beer;
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
... for the seed corn
... , Enuma Anu Enlil,
The statue of Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria, which is being erected in the temple of the god Aššur, (and) which Sennacherib, king of Assyria, your lord, has ordered, is the work of the sculptor(s) of Ešarra. It is being overseen by Aššur-šallim-ahhe, the overseer of the temple of the god Aššur, (and) by Šamaš-šallim-ahhe, the overseer of the ... The sculpt
... years
... the palace overseer
Disregard what they speak with (their) mouths, or what they think...
... to Nabû'a
Now then I am writing to you: be attentive and do your work!
The chief of the extensive army, the commander-in-chief, the grand vizier, the chief judge, the chief cook, the chief confectioner, the chief baker, the chief of the extensive army, the commander-in-chief, the grand vizier, the chief judge, the chief cook, the chief confectioner, the chief of the extensive army, the commander-in-chief, the grand vizier, the chief judge, the chief cook, the chief confectioner,
An estate of 1 hectare ... , well ... , threshing floor ... —
... opened ...
... after the king had asked them, they said: "... "
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
Bel and Nabû ...
If a meteor flashes from east to west: ... will take place.
an estate of 2 decares adjoining Ba'al-ili and Ilu-ereš;
May Nabû (and) Marduk bless the king, my lord! May Aššur,  Šamaš, Bel and Nabû give the king, my lord, long days!
Witness Mannu-ki-Adad, royal bodyguard.
The king, my lord, should have inquired (about the matter): "Is it true that the son of Zerî is a servant of the king, my lord?" He is a ... of the king, my lord.
Bel-kenu-uṣur,
(As for) the city Uppume, the royal city of Urzana, which is situated like a bird on a high mountain peak, (10) (and) the people of the city Uppume who had not bowed down to the yoke of the kings, my ancestors, and had not pulled their yoke, they lifted their heads and saw the assault of my mighty battle array, and their hearts pounded. (As for) the people of the city Uppume who had not bowed down to the yoke of the kings, my ancestors, they bowed down to my yoke
If the moon becomes visible on the 30th day: frost; there will be rumor of an enemy.
... Urdu and the men of ...
At that time, the temple of the god Aššur, my lord, which Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, a king who came before me, had previously built — (this temple) had become dilapidated and I, Adad-nārārī, king of Assyria, a king who comes after me, rebuilt (it).
Witness Šarru-kenu.
The troops of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, have entered the city Quhna, a fortress of Mugallu the Melidean. The city is well. The land of the king, my lord, is well.
I will not ... and not ...
We kept watch; we did not see the moon.
(As for) the throne-dais, the seat of his (Marduk’s) exalted divinity, I cast fifty talents of shiny zaḫalû-silver into bricks and (thereby) enlarged it.
Witness Zarutî, chariot driver of the crown prince.
... my
Witness Sin-zeru-ibni, ...
Fingernail of Marduk-eriba, owner of the garden, house, and the land being sold.
heard ...
If Scorpius is black: the king will carry out evil deeds against the land.
The palace of Aššur-rēša-iši, designate of the god Anu, whose priesthood is pleasing to the god Aššur and the great gods, (and) whose deeds the gods Aššur, Enlil, and Šamaš love, I, Ninurta-kudurrī-uṣur, governor of the land of Sūḫu and the land of Mari, built for my lordly pleasure. I made the dimensions of the room of the šaḫuru twenty-two large cubits (1
I said: "...
x, the stewardesses of the temple;
... the presence of the god ...
in all, an estate of 4 hectares of land in cultivation in the town of Saqamanu —
Does your great divinity know it? Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
Witness Ilumma-le'i, cohort commander.
... he/I established ... and ... I made ... dwell (as safely) as on a meadow ... I made ... dwell (as safely) as on a meadow... I made their hearts happy (and) their faces shine... the king of the gods, the god Marduk, became reconciled with Babylon (and) ... he (the god Marduk) took up residence in Esagil, his palace.
If the earth quakes all day: dispersal of the land.
The 'station' is present. The 'path' ... on the left ...
they will go ...
... who ...
... Babylon
of Nabû-belu-ka''in ...
The prefect of the city and the prefect of the land have the usufruct of the corn taxes of these towns. The corn taxes of these towns shall not be collected, the straw taxes shall not be gathered. The prefect of the city and the prefect of the land have the usufruct of the corn taxes of these towns for as long as they hold their positions.
(As for) Ḫanūnu of the city Gaza, he heard about the advance of my expeditionary force (while he was) inside the city Memphis, and (then) he abandoned the city Gaza, a city that was (once) his royal residence, and (v 10') fled inside the city Thebes. The kings, governors, (and) officials whom I had stationed in Egypt came to meet me and kissed my feet.
... x hectares of field in the village of A... ,
From Zakir.
Shalmaneser, strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Ashurnasirpal (II), strong king, king of the universe, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), (who was) also strong king, king of the universe, and king of Assyria:
Witness NN.
I am now writing to the king, my lord: may Aššur, Bel and Nabû give the king, my lord, a straight answer to what he is asking me! If it is acceptable to the king, my lord, let me hear from the mouth of the king, my lord, (about) the matter of this query of mine, and I will (then) do accordingly. May Aššur, Bel and Nabû bless the king, my lord!
... Aššur-ila'i
Witness Puṭi-Aya.
I have given 50 sheep to the scribe of the vizier and 400 sheep to the chief scribe.
If the moon becomes visible on the 30th day: there will be frost; variant: rumor of the enemy.
Witness Marduk-aplu-iddina, son of ...
Bel-na'id, son of NN, servant of NN, has contracted and bought it for x minas of silver from Ahi-...
... -Issar, 3 seahs of his ... ;
Month Adar (XII), 10th day, eponym year of Mar-larim.
On the 18th day the king went up to the House of God. He kissed the ground before Aššur. He poured out a libation bowl. He ascended (the dais) and lifted Lord Tiara upon his head. He went out through the Kalkal Gate and came in through the Kalkal Gate. The king greeted the ... s.
adjoining ...
... the temple of Nanaya
or Mukin-zeri or ...
Witness Še'i-Adad.
Ditto by all the gods of Arbela!
In the month Adar (XII), the month of the god Ea — the lord of humankind, the one who fashioned the physique of my royal majesty — I entered the House of Succession, a place of instruction and counsel, and I grasped hold of the hands of the great gods, an audience gift (presented) by the people of the lands Nairi. In a pure manner, with a prayer of blessing, I made supplications to the gods Šamaš and Adad, the lords of divination, and they heard my prayers.
6 ... ,
... the gods on the left of the lion ...
... he is
adjoining the field of Nabû-duru-uṣur,
of Kiṣir-Aššur, the governor of the temple of Aššur.
To the king, my lord: your servant Ašipâ. Good health to the king, my lord!
If in the month of the god's (appeal) to the king the sun stands still in the middle of noontime: the king of the world will be shut up.
What have they given to me?
To the king, my lord: your servant, Nabû-šumu-iddina. The very  best of health to the king, my lord. May Nabû and Marduk bless the  king, my lord.
from the town of Daduru ...
If a planet becomes visible in Elul (VI): rising of business, thriving of grain.
At that time, (with regard to) Ebabbar, the temple of the god Šamaš, my lord, the inner enclosure wall had become old, dilapidated, and weak. I removed its dilapidated section(s). I made its structure larger than the one in the days of the past. I built (and) completed (it) from its foundation(s) to its crenellations. I strengthened its foundation(s) more than previously.
1 ditto, ditto, edging ditto, knotted, red;
In the eponymy of Šarru-nūrāni (712 B.C.), I marched a second time to the land Ḫanigalbat. I captured the city Sūru, his fortified city, together with the cities in its environs. I marched to the source of the Tigris, the place where the water comes out.
The shepherd ... has been killed, the ... of sheep and goats ... have been left in the open country; the rest of the sheep ...
... to ...
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether the magnates and governors of Bit-Kari and Saparda, who have gone to collect a tribute of horses from the Medes,
of Su...
Scholars of the king.
If the earth quakes at night: worry for the land; abandonment of the land.
At that time, (as for) Birisḫatri, a city ruler of the Medes, (and) Sarati  (and) Pariḫi, two sons of Gagî, a city ruler of the land Saḫi, who had cast off the yoke of my lordship, I conquered (and) plundered seventy-five of their fortified cities.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
... the mountain
(As for) the Cimmerians, a dangerous enemy who had never feared my ancestors, and, with regard to me, had not grasped the feet of my royal majesty, (iii 5') with the support of (the god) Aššur and the goddess Ištar, my lords, he (Gyges) clamped (them) in manacles, handcuffs, (and) neck-stocks and sent (them) before me, together with his substantial audience gift(s). (iii 10') I constantly saw the might of the gods Aš
... the magnates
(It is) in the hands of Nabû-zeru-iddina, mayor of Borsippa.
Your servant Aqar-Bel-lumur: I would gladly die for the king of the universe, my lord! Say to the king, my lord: I have sent my messenger to greet the king of the universe, the horses and the soldiers.
Witness Aširu.
I ordered the march to the city Madaktu, his royal city. In the month Tebētu (X), bitter cold set in and continuous rain fell, and I was afraid of the snow in the gorges, the outflows of the mountains, (so) I turned around and took the road to Assyria.
Witness Nabû-ahu-uṣur, scribe.
Concerning the substitute king about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me, the substitute king will enter the House of Aššur on the 14th day.
2 houses in Nineveh, 1 house in Calah belonging to Nabû-na'id, at the disposal of Nabû-na'id.
The 'well-being' is destroyed. The gall bladder is flattened. The 'base of the throne' is present.
Total 4 Kushite horses,
To the king, my lord: your servant Aššur-alik-pani. Good health to the king, my lord!
They have entered the Palace ...
If Adad thunders on the day of disappearance of the moon: the harvest ...
Month Adar (XII), 22nd day, eponym year of Dananu, the sartinnu.
The bakers take 10 homers of wheat and 3 homers of barley for bread, including the dipper of oil-bread and that for the journey of the gods  before the Image. The brewers take 14 homers of barley for beer, including the simdu-flour and kakkallu-flour and that for the journey of the gods. The cooks take 10 homers of wheat and 3 homers of barley for soup, including the dipper of oil-bread and that for the journey of the gods.
a total of 5 persons, owners of the vineyard being sold.
You shall not make common cause with (any)one who may revolt against Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, concerning whom he has concluded (this) treaty with you, but, should they seize you by force, you shall flee and come to Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate.
May they (the gods) make your flesh and the flesh of your brothers, your sons and your daughters as black as bitumen, and may they make your ... like the ... of a chameleon.
Is it decreed and confirmed in a favorable case, by the command of your great divinity, Šamaš, great lord? Will he who can see, see it? Will he who can hear, hear it?
I placed Tu-Baʾlu on the royal throne over them and imposed upon him tribute (and) payment (in recognition) of my overlordship (to be delivered) yearly (and) without interruption. I installed the weapon of the god Aššur, my lord, inside him and made (him) bow down to my yoke.
12 shekels of silver belonging to NN, at the disposal of Tab...
The chariot-driver will go (with) the team of horses of the chariot. He will bring the team of horses of the chariot into the house of Aššur and into the storehouse, and will give them water to drink.
If the moon and sun are in balance: the land will become stable; reliable speech will be placed in the mouth of people; the king of the land will make the throne last long.
... -ili
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial payment from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, large musukkannu-trees, donkeys, camels, oxen, and sheep and goats.
until the ... s come.
... of ...
The breast-bone is thick. A ... of silver ...
11 shekels of ... -silver;
The sons of the king, my lord, should stay in my presence.
in all x; 1 house.
1 ...
If the moon becomes late at an inappropriate time and is not seen: attack of a ruling city.
1 cow of silver;
He has seized Munnabitu, the son of the Ukkean, and is ... ing him as a substitute for ...
x (homers) of barley, of the merchants.
... I annexed to Assyria the extensive land of Bīt-Ḫazaʾili (Damascus) in its entirety, from Mount Lebanon as far as the cities Gilead (and) Abil-šiṭṭi, which are  on the border of the land Bīt-Ḫumria (Israel), (and) I placed a eunuch of mine as provincial governor over them. I annexed to Assyria the cities Ḫamānu, Ḫašmar, (and) Samʾū
Like a fierce wild bull, with my select bodyguard and my merciless combat troops, I took the lead of them (the soldiers in my camp). I proceeded through the gorges of the streams, the outflows of the mountains, (and) rugged slopes in (my) chair. (iv 5') Where it was too difficult for (my) chair, I leapt forward on my (own) two feet like a mountain goat. I ascended the highest peaks against them. Where my knees became tired, I sat down upon the mountain rock and drank cold water from a water skin
Let me write to you: you have done a great favour to Assurbanipal, the great crown prince designate, son of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, your lord, by making this treaty with him and by putting yourselves in his place. And in return he will do a great favour to you, (namely) protect you and your seed from the hands of your enemy.
If the moon becomes visible in Iyyar (II) on the 30th day: the Ahlamû will devour the wealth of the Westland.
2 minas of Nabû-pašir, the goldsmith.
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
The woman Sukkaya, 3 spans (high);
Instead of their seals they impressed their fingernails.
The heart of the ram is normal...
Anu, the Great Gods, Šalimtu, Šunipuru, Narudu, Kubu, Ningirsu, Ebeh, Adad, Šala, Taramuwa, Nisaba, Adad-Lightning, Niphu-image, Girru, Light-image, Ningirsu, Ea-šarru, Damkina, Usumû:
Assurbanipal, king of Assyria, who is now ill, and on whom the 'hand' of god ... is being 'placed' in extispicy, (whom) your great divinity knows —
in the well ...
Abi-hari, reporter.
ditto, the chief of accounts;
... the city of Šabirešu ...
My messenger ... ; he is now on his way to the Palace.
... Month Adar (XII), 22nd day, eponym year of NN.
The 16th day, when the god makes his triumphal entry into ... , is the day of the great god, the god Marduk ...
... he did not release ...
Šumma-Aššur has contracted and bought them for 30 shekels of silver.
... the king, my lord, ...
in the charge of Aqaraya, son of the merchant Ilu-šumu-iddina.
May (this query) go to your great divinity, O Šamaš, great lord, and may an oracle be given as an answer.
I have sent you (pl.) your ... , (but) I have seen no reply to my letter.
... s, ditto;
The maid whom the king, my lord, sent to me, (and whom) I sent to the palace, saying: "I have sent her to the palace," (and whom) he has not sent back to me, is ... ; she is not even listed in the household of the palace. I have sent (word), and they are looking for her, but they have not found her.
... should eat
(As for) the one who alters my inscribed object (and) disrespects my words, may the great gods of heaven and netherworld overthrow his kingship, deprive him of his life, (and) make his name, his seed, his offspring, (and) his progeny disappear from the land. May the god Aššur, my lord, strike him down with his weapon in the midst of battle.
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
... Arrapha
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
Now ... to Mušallim-...
I have appointed ... in the service of the treasurer, in the city of Calah, and given him the following orders:
To the king, my lord: your servant Issar-nadin-apli, the foreman of the collegium of ten (scribes) of Arbela. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
699 — the towns ...
Witness Nabû-...
Aššur-da''in-šarru, NN, NN,
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
4 ... -garments of linen, ... ;
If he does not come, the king, my lord, should know (about it).
8 wooden ... s ... for ... ;
... of the wineskins
This (omen) is from the series.
As to the news of the Puqudu, he has entered Waisi on the 11th of Tammuz (IV). He has killed Remanni-Adad, the son of Aššur-naṣir, and appointed him in his stead. He has also killed the brother of Ahu-ila'i, the son of Uriakka, and appointed him in his stead.
As soon as he has harvested his harvest, he will ... and come to me. If I have advanced towards him, he will speak with me; if not, he will wait for me. I shall speak with him in the king's presence, and he will tell me everything.
If the moon becomes visible on the 1st day: good for Akkad, bad for Elam and the Westland.
Month of Iyyar (II), ... th day, eponym year of NN, governor of ...
... I have ... ed his ...
... are full to the brim.
... of the Itu'eans ...
... of the house of the crown prince,
in the mouth of ...
Witness Kenu-...
... the Ru'ua who
In Sivan (III) on the 1st day the Breast of Panther stood in the middle of heaven opposite Aššur; on the 2nd day it was moved up to the heavenly 'residence' of Aššur; on the 3rd day it was moved up again to the heavenly 'residence' of Šamaš; on the 4th day it was moved up again to the heavenly 'residence' of Adad; on the 5th day it was moved up again to the heavenly 'residence' of Bel; on the 6th
... their ... is to be watched.
they should act according to ...
... of the ... s
I brought out a palace woman and the sons of Teumman — the king of the land Elam whose head I had cut off during a previous campaign on the instruction(s) of the gods Aššur, Bēl (Marduk), and Nabû — together with the rest of the people living in the city Bīt-Imbî and I counted (them) as booty.
Witness Mannu-ki-Arbail, son of Urdu-Aya.
Aya-yada' who ...
Nabû-šumu-iddina, my scribe, whom I sent to the king, my lord
I decorated Emašmaš (and) Egašankalama with silver (and) gold, (and) filled (them) with splendor.
Afterwards, Teumman, the (very) image of a gallû-demon, sat on the throne of Urtaku. He constantly sought out evil (ways) to kill the children of Urtaku (and) the children of Ummanaldašu (Ḫumban-ḫaltaš II), the brother of Urtaku. Ummanigaš, Ummanappa, (and) Tammarītu — the sons of Urtaku, the king of the land Elam — Kudurru (and) Parrû — the sons of Ummanaldaš
Witness Imbî.
Bel-dan,
4 sheep ... ;
... s, 1 seah of sesame,
He brought before me (his) daughter, his own offspring, and the daughter(s) of ... He sent at the same time his eldest son, who had never crossed the sea, to do obeisance to me. (... ) I received from him his daughter and the daughter(s) of his brothers, together with a large marriage gift.
I have now sealed the chest and am sending it to the king, my lord.
I wrote to the city rulers of the Medes as follows: "Let your horses come  to me, and let them be a fortress for me."
Witness NN, ša šēpi guard.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
Bel-aha-iddin is placed as a pledge at the disposal of Dannaya in lieu of 1/2 mina of silver.
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
Witness Aššur-šallim, ditto.
... bi ...
I conquered the land Elam in its entirety. I carried off to Assyria its king, his palace women, his eunuchs, his battle troops, his horses, his mules, his Bactrian camels, his oxen, (and) his sheep and goats, without number. (v 10) I detached from his land the cities Susa, Pidilma, (and) Ḫidalu, cities that were formerly within the territory of Assyria which the Elamites had taken away in the time of my ancestor(s). I
The 28th day: joy of heart.
... before ...
Witness Mannu-ki-ahhe, conscript.
... are present. The 'path' is present.
In my rage, I unleashed a fierce assault on Cutha, and (then) I slaughtered the warriors surrounding its wall like sheep and took possession of the city. I killed the governors (and) nobles who had committed crime(s) and (iii 5') hung their corpses on towers around the city; I counted the citizens who had committed the criminal acts as booty; (and) I commanded that the rest of them, (those) who were not guilty of crimes or wrongdoing, (to) whom no penalty was due, be allowed to go free.
Witness Ša-la-mašê.
Five minas of silver by (the mina) of Carchemish belonging to Nabû-ahu-iddina, eunuch, at the disposal of Nabû-šumu-iddina, son of Nabû-mušeṣi, also a eunuch.
Total, the ... of ... the city of ...
Mannu-ki-Aššur, of the courtier(s).
6 bags of (mixed) kernels.
Aššur-nārārī, king of the universe, son of Šamšī-Adad (V), king of Assyria: (brick) belonging to the pedestal (under) the bulls of the gateway of the temple of the god Adad.
Tablet of Aššur-killanni, the sartinnu.
He said: "Nabû-ušabši ...
Total of the men from Byblos.
To the king, my lord: your servant NN. Good health to the king, my lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord!
Whoever in the future lodges a complaint and breaks the contract, whether Remanni-Adad or his sons or his grandsons or his brothers or his nephews or his prefect or the mayor of his city or any relative of his, and seeks a lawsuit or litigation against Šumma-ilani and his sons,
(As for) the people of the land Arzâ, a region of the land Mannea that Ursâ (Rusâ) had annexed and appropriated for himself, (iv 5') they became frightened on account of the villainous acts that my bow had in store for them and they fled to the land Urarṭu. (As for) the people of the city Uppume, a region of the land Urarṭu that Ursâ (Rusâ) had annexed and appropriated for himself, they saw the villainous acts that my bow had in store for them
Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria: Maniye, the king of the city Ukku, became frightened by my battle array, abandoned the city Ukku, a city upon which he relied, and fled far away. (As for) the population living inside it, who had flown away like birds to the peak of a rugged mountain, I pursued them and defeated them on the peak of (that) mountain. I burned the city Ukku, his royal city, with fire. I laid waste to the land Urarṭu (and) made the
Total, the food master ...
To the king, my lord: your servant Kiṣir-Aššur. Good health to the king, my lord!
Ninurta-ilaya,
... Calah ...
... city god
... to them
Ešu, “House of the secrets”: the house of Šarrat-nipha, the house of Aya.
I, the god Aššur, the father of the gods, the one who fashioned the physique of my lordly majesty, granted to my lordly majesty power, virility, (and) outstanding strength. I placed in the hands of my lordly majesty the just scepter, the exalted staff, the symbol of kingship, (and) the awe-inspiring rod, (and) I made (them) stand in triumph over the enemies of my lordly majesty. I gave to my lordly majesty the four quarters (of the world) as
Concerning what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Ilu-pija-uṣur the sheikh of Abi-Yate' has written to me: 'The king's forces have entered into the interior of the country'" —
... the chariot of the goddess Ištar
The king knows that I am a poor man, that I keep the watch of the king, my lord, and am guilty of no negligence within the palace. Now, if I have fallen into the hands of the king's eunuch, let the king do as he deems best; but why has the king, my lord, thus humiliated me?
He shall contest in his lawsuit and not succeed.
Palace of Ashurnasirpal, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Tukultī-Ninurta (II), great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, son of Adad-nārārī (II) (who was) also great king, strong king, king of the world, (and) king of Assyria; valiant man who acts with the support of Aššur, the god Šamaš, and the goddess Ištar, his lords, and
1 female donkey ...
... we have done
I have brought out the barley and stored it in the town of Mari... The men of the house of Sasî have not agreed to bring it but are holding it back, saying: "... "
with ...
Month Marchesvan (VIII), 21st day, eponym year of Dadî, treasurer.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "The son of the šandabakku has said to me: 'If you send a bodyguard to me, I shall seize him and send him to Assyria'" — if I send a bodyguard to him, will he seize him and send him to Assyria?
... the goddess Tašmētu, the great lady, ... the goddesses Ištar of Nineveh (and) Ištar of Arbela, the great ladies, my lords, ... the one who renovates Eanna, the one who completes the cult centers, ... the one who makes enemy land(s) obedient, ... who makes my reign secure, ... who makes my reign pleasing to the people, ... who makes my reign endure, ... who makes my offspring (and) seed firm for eternity, ... who makes my rule pleasing to the people
The treaty of the great gods which they made you swear, you  have broken. You have sinned against the treaty of the great gods which  they made you swear. You have put your hands on the possessions of the temples,  taken the possessions of the temples for yourselves, and put them in your  houses. You have sold the gold, silver, (and) precious stones at market value  to the land Elam. You have traded the gold, silver, (and) precious stones for  ...
The charge of the rear palace is well. The king, my lord, can be glad.
Witness Ubru-Nabû, ...
Kakkullanu, deputy of the team-commander, has contracted and bought them for 5 minas of silver by the mina of the king.
Disregard that the oracle query has become jumbled in the mouth of the haruspex, your servant...
Witness Bel-na'id,
Idranu, shepherd; 1 woman; 1 son; 1 daughter, of 5 spans' height: in the town of Hasame in the steppe of the city of Azari.
The king, my lord, should know it.
2, NN, chief ... ;
... the xth day;
... the servant of Sin-naṣir who has been in Nineveh, the servant of Nabû-naṣir who has been in Nippur, the servant of Šamaš-naṣir who has been in Cutha, the servant of Iddin-Ea who has been in Ur, the servant of Nadinu who has been in Kish, the servant of Šulmu-beli who has been in Der, the servant of Nabû-šezib who has been in Borsippa, the servant of Nabû-šumu-iddina
Aššur-bani, the ... of the Palace Superintendent, has said to me: "The men who were given to me have not been put in order. They are ... ing about like runaways. I have several times written to the Palace, but (to no avail), they have not given me any of them. I have (already) given 100 men to the Palace Superintendent, but he has not agreed to give me any more."
If a fog rolls in Adar (XII): the land will go to ruin.
The moment that Bel and Nabû placed in my hands the kingship of the lands, I sent my servants to the king, my lord. I said to them: "Go and see the king, my lord, and may the king, my lord, give you orders concerning the house of your lords."
The palace of Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria.
Concerning the ... about whom the king, my lord, wrote to me: "... "
of the palace supervisor ... of the city of ...
... to Eulmaš, the sheikh of the Filihini, the sheikh of the ... , and the sheikh of the Bīt-Dakkuri, and they killed him. They cut off his head and they brought it to Nineveh, before me.
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
as we ...
I took the city Elenzaš as a royal city and a fortress for that district, then I changed its former name and called it Kār-Sennacherib.
1,000 (homers) of barley belonging to the harem manageress of the queen mother, at the disposal of Šulmu-beli-lašme, ...
they have completed ...
I sought and the (divine) oracle was given to me in the affirmative. I refurbished the emblem of her great divinity (and) made her sit upon a throne-dais as (her) eternal abode. I firmly (re)-established her precious cultic ordinances and properly carried out her cultic rites.
Disregard that an unclean man or woman has come near the place of the extispicy and made it unclean...
... he is a ... ; he does not know
Month of Kuzallu, tenth day, eponymy of Ninurta-ilāya, chief eunuch.
Witness Munnabitu, scribe.
... I will write to you.
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Ask Ṣillaya, he knows the house of his father!" —
to ...
The plundered of the land of Aššur, which ...
x minas of silver belonging to Zabinu, at the disposal of Nadinu.
Witness Šulmu-beli-lamur, from Calah.
and when he fell,
I ask you, Šamaš, great lord, whether, (should) Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, appoint the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the position which is written in this papyrus,
100 (hectares) of field in the province of Lahiru, 100 (hectares) of field in the province of Isana, 100 (hectares) of field in the province of Tillê, 100 (hectares) of field in the province of Manṣuate, 100 (hectares) of field in the province of Ura, 100 (hectares) of field in the province of Naṣibina, 100 (hectares) of field in the province
... the fortress of ...
... who loves his princeliness,
We have sent ... to NN and to ... , (but) they have not come ...
... huzūnu-garments, felted, the edging ... ;
If at the sun's rising a cloudbank lies to its right: the flood will come.
... Izzia, ditto: 2 persons;
The god Aššur, king of the gods, looked steadfastly upon me among all of the rulers and he made my weapons greater than (those of) all who sit on (royal) daises.
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments, (or) has eaten, drunk, or anointed himself with anything unclean...
Witness Adad-naṣir. A total of 10 witnesses from Ispallurê.
... I wrote to him
10 minas of silver, 10 minas of gold, 100 talents of bronze, 100 talents of iron, and one stone (for) the ... of the bed of the god Bēl (Marduk) in the temple of the god Bēl (Marduk) in the city of Kalḫu.
He took it as a loan. It shall increase by a fourth.
... Witness Inurta-šarru-uṣur.
... to the guard
If the moon is surrounded by a black halo: the month holds rain.
Witness Nabû-šezib.
... nâ ...
Disregard that a clean or an unclean person has touched the sacrificial sheep, or blocked the way of the sacrificial sheep...
x+8, in the charge of Metunu, the treasurer of the queen mother.
Witness Nabû-zeru-iddina, chariot driver of the crown prince.
... s, to be polished;
Disregard that he who touches the forehead of the sheep is dressed in his ordinary soiled garments...
The money is paid completely. That ... is purchased and acquired. Any revocation, lawsuit, or litigation is void.
the man ...
As to the ... about which you wrote, they should do as they wish.
... they will not listen to you ... and they will not obey you.
... until now
The city Ṣiṣṣirtu.
... the god Nabû in the month of Shebat (XI) before the gods of the House of Aššur.
Should Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, appoint the man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity, to the position which is written in this papyrus?
After I had finished the work on my palace, I invited inside it the god Aššur, the great lord, (and) the gods and goddesses living in Assyria, then I made splendid offerings and presented my gift(s). I made fine oil from olives and aromatics from the orchards (planted) on newly tilled soil. At the inauguration of the palace, I had the heads of the subjects of my land drenched (and) I watered their insides with sweet wine.
Zeru-ukin, son of Sargon (II), king of Assyria.
The people living in the cities of the land Ḫatti, ... , the city Ḫarḫar, ... , the city Kubanaše, ... , the city Kulmadara, ... , the city Sassu, ... , the city Lupsua, ... , the city Šašila, ... , the city Aššur-māssu-urappiš, ... , the city Ṣimirra, ... , the city Arqâ, ... , the city Enu, ... , the city Sassu, ... , the city Kul
To the king, my lord: your servant Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the scribe of the king's brother. Good health to the king, my lord!
... I did not put there
... will they attack, kill, plunder ... ? Will they ambush (them) on the road or in a ... ? Will they ... an ambush in a city or in the country?
We shall write down the whole report and send it to the king, our lord. The  report should be written down before the eclipse takes place.
does not agree ...
they will bring the horses and come.
I have written ...
I have sent five boats to Merodach-Baladan; one has arrived. The king, my lord, should know (this). These are the ones that have arrived:
... I have not heard. If ... , I shall write to the king, my lord, whatever ...
... , 4 persons;
a ditto of quinces;
... The middle of the 'path' is effaced. The 'strength' is present. The 'well-being' is present. The 'path' on the left of the gall bladder is present. The 'base of the throne' is present. The 'finger' is thick ...
... his ... s
3 1-year-old ewes:
Mars is the star of the Westland; it is bright, and its appearance is red. The planet Jupiter is the star of Akkad; it is faint, and its appearance is yellowish. The planet Saturn is the star of the land of Sumer and Akkad; it is faint, and its appearance is yellowish.
I have sent ...
9 (cuts of) meat, the Review Palace;
So that the construction of my palace might be carried out correctly, at that time, the god Aššur and the goddess Ištar revealed to me the presence of white limestone in the city Balāṭāya. (vi 1) Therein, I quarried mighty mountain sheep colossi, sphinxes, and large stone slabs for the construction of my lordly palace.
It has a 'station.' The 'paths' are 2, the lower one is short ...
To the god Nabû, powerful, splendid, pre-eminent, exalted, wise, scribe of everything, lord of everything, who makes opposing forces agree, who knows everything, splendid, perfect, who has gathered to himself all the (divine) offices, who controls the omens, who gives advice to the gods, the one who resides in Baltil (Aššur), the one who dwells in Esagil, the great lord, his lord:
Let me hear the well-being of the king, my lord, and may I be happy!
... Witness ...
... my ...
I have now sent my messenger to the Palace. He will bring me the king's sealed order and I shall immediately send him to the Palace.
... we shall do ... and ...
The son of Daltâ has written to the son of Nurzanu: "Let us stand together and ... the tribute."
May Nabû, bearer of the tablet of fates of the gods, erase your name and your seed from the land.
... the town of Til-Barsip
40 sheep, 1 male sheep,
I brought Dunānu (and) Samgunu, sons of Bēl-iqīša, out of the city Šuanna (Babylon), together with the rest of the people of their land, and I counted (them) as booty. (vii 10') I brought them to Assyria, to the city Aššur, my capital city, and I had them stand before me. I made them wear garments with multi-colored trim (and) placed gold bracelets around their wrists. I made them stand before me.
should ask ...
4 Kushite horses from the palace herald;
adjoining the estate of Ba... —
He shall pay the silver back on the new moon of the month of Ab (V). If he does not pay, it shall increase by a fourth.
... at the disposal of Aššur-za... ,
Indabibi, who sat on the throne of the land Elam after Tammarītu, knew about the might of my weapons that had previously prevailed over the land Elam and (as for) the Assyrians whom I had sent (viii 10') to aid Nabû-bēl-šumāti, son of Marduk-apla-iddina (II) (Merodach-baladan), with whom they used to march about protecting his land like a friend and ally (and) whom Nabû-bēl-šumā
12 minas of silver, capital, belonging to Šamaš-abu'a, at the disposal of the servant of the deputy.
He placed (it) in the lap of the goddess Ištar, his lady, and returned the plundered gods to their (proper) place.
The gods of the House of Aššur in the courtyard.
1 duck 2-seah jar of Nabû-šarru-uṣur, the priest of Bel;
To the king, my lord: your servant Nashir-Bel. Good health to the king, my lord!
... Qurdi-Nabû
Nabû-šezib;
6 straight garments, felted, the edging ... ;
I roared loudly like a storm (and) thundered like the god Adad against all of the troops of the wicked enemies. By the command of the god Aššur, the great lord, my lord, I blew like the onset of a severe storm against the enemy on (their) flanks and front lines. With the weapons of the god Aššur, my lord, and my fierce battle array, I turned them back and made them retreat. (v 70) I shot the troops of the enemy with uṣṣu-arrows (and) mulmullu
... of the palace manager
Sennacherib, great king, strong king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), capable shepherd, favorite of the great gods, guardian of truth who loves justice, renders assistance, goes to the aid of the weak, (and) strives after good deeds, perfect man, virile warrior, foremost of all rulers, the bridle that controls the insubmissive, (and) the one who strikes enemies with lightning:
I uprooted all of the Aḫlamû (Arameans) (and) Sutians. I put to the sword the inhabitants of the city Ḫirimmu, not sparing (any of) their offspring. I conquered the land of the Yasubigallians, a dangerous enemy. I destroyed the land Ellipi, (making it) like a mound of ruins.
Aplaya, ... of the queen mother;
Ashur-belu-ka''in,
The man whose name is written in this papyrus and placed before your great divinity ...
This (sluice) gate of the watercourse opened by itself without (the help) of spade or shovel and let an abundance of water flow through. Its (sluice) gate was not opened through the work of human hands. According to the heart’s desire of the gods, I made (it) gurgle with water. After I inspected the canal and made sure its construction was performed correctly, I offered pure sacrifices of fattened oxen (and) an abundance of sheep to the great gods, who march at my side (and) who make my reign secure. I cl
The chariot which goes to the Akitu House and comes back has no driver. Without a driver it rocks about.
The woman Ša-pî-Bel, 1 son of 3 spans, 1 woman,
If the moon makes an eclipse in Nisan (I): the cultivated fields of the land will prosper.
He carries the jewellery of the crown prince on his neck.
... May Marduk and Zarpanitu ...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "Why have you not sent me any news of the Manneans?" —
... the gods of the sky
to ...
the king, my lord, ...
To the 'farmer,' our lord: your servants Adad-šumu-uṣur and Marduk-šakin-šumi. Good health to our lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless  our lord!
in the presence of ...
From Ašaredu.
Witness Balasî.
The king, my lord, may do as he deems best.
... I decorated it in a splendid fashion; I surrounded it with knobbed nails of bronze. I hung doors of cedar, cypress, daprānu-juniper, and meskannu-wood in its doorways. I took in great quantities and put therein ...
The king has sent ...
I built (it) from its foundations to its crenellations for my lordly pleasure. I made it bigger than the one in the days of my ancestors by (re)claiming land from the Tigris River (by filling it in).
... the delegate ...
Witness Il-immi.
... who are brought to us
... of oxen ...
Šamaš, great lord, give me a firm positive answer to what I am asking you!
Disregard that an unclean person has performed extispicy in this place...
I opened up a foundation pit for the outer wall, Badnigerimḫuluḫa, (which means) “Terrorizer of Enemies,” then I dug down forty-five nindanu and made (it) reach the water table. I bound together strong mountain stone in the water below and above I expertly carried out its construction with large limestone (blocks) up to its copings.
... Il-yada' ...
... I (and) the šandabakku
He shall give (them) back in the month of Adar (XII). If he does not, they shall increase by the same amount.
... them. He is ...
In the course of my campaign, I received a substantial payment from Nabû-bēl-šumāti, the official in charge of the city Ḫararatu: gold, silver, ...
in all x persons, servants of these gentlemen —
... s to the king
has taken ...
Sphinxes of alabaster, as well as sphinxes of cast urudû-copper that were overlaid with zaḫalû-silver, and sphinxes of cast ... -metal, whose features were brilliant:  I erected over them columns of ebony, cypress, cedar, daprānu-juniper, juniper, and Indian wood, with pašallu-gold and silver inlays, and (then) I positioned the architraves of the inner rooms of my lordly residence (on those columns).
... to the deity ...
... the letter which my brother ...
Performed in Arbela.
... The coils of the colon are 16 in number...
As to what the king, my lord, wrote to me: "The Itu'eans of the commander-in-chief should help (the other) Itu'eans!" —
As to the Borsippeans, I have written to them as follows: "Since you have not sent me any news of the Tabalean, Aššur-mukin-paleya has come to Šamaš-naṣir and told him: 'The king has defeated the Tabalean. The king has also defeated the Dilmunians.'"
To the king, my lord: your servant, Nabû-šarru-uṣur. Good health to the king, my lord. May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, my lord.
Afterwards, the kings of the land Ḫatti — the city rulers of the city Tummu, the city rulers of the land Ištunda, the city rulers of the land Kasku, (and) the city rulers of the land Tabal — (iv 55) became frightened by my mighty battle array, abandoned their cities, and fled far away. I conquered the city Tummu, their royal city, (and) the cities in its environs. I destroyed, devastated, (and) burned with fire (those) cities. (iv
To the king, our lord: your servants Nabû-zer-ketti-lešir and Salamanu. Good health to the king, our lord! May Nabû and Marduk bless the king, our lord!
